Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal tast Brought Death into the World, and all our woe, With loss of EDEN, till one greater Man Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat, Sing Heav'nly Muse, that on the secret top Of OREB, or of SINAI, didst inspire That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed, In the Beginning how the Heav'ns and Earth Rose out of CHAOS: Or if SION Hill Delight thee more, and SILOA'S Brook that flow'd Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence Invoke thy aid to my adventrous Song, That with no middle flight intends to soar Above th' AONIAN Mount, while it pursues Things unattempted yet in Prose or Rhime. And chiefly Thou O Spirit, that dost prefer Before all Temples th' upright heart and pure, Instruct me, for Thou know'st; Thou from the first Wast present, and with mighty wings outspread Dove-like satst brooding on the vast Abyss And mad'st it pregnant: What in me is dark Illumine, what is low raise and support; That to the highth of this great Argument I may assert th' Eternal Providence, And justifie the wayes of God to men. Say first, for Heav'n hides nothing from thy view Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause Mov'd our Grand Parents in that happy State, Favour'd of Heav'n so highly, to fall off From their Creator, and transgress his Will For one restraint, Lords of the World besides? Who first seduc'd them to that fowl revolt? Th' infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile Stird up with Envy and Revenge, deceiv'd The Mother of Mankinde, what time his Pride Had cast him out from Heav'n, with all his Host Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring To set himself in Glory above his Peers, He trusted to have equal'd the most High, If he oppos'd; and with ambitious aim Rais'd impious War in Heav'n and Battel proud With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power Hurld headlong flaming from th' Ethereal Skie With hideous ruine and combustion down To bottomless perdition, there to dwell In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire, Who durst defie th' Omnipotent to Arms. Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night To mortal men, he with his horrid crew Lay vanquisht, rowling in the fiery Gulfe Confounded though immortal: But his doom Reserv'd him to more wrath; for now the thought Both of lost happiness and lasting pain Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes That witness'd huge affliction and dismay Mixt with obdurate pride and stedfast hate: At once as far as Angels kenn he views The dismal Situation waste and wilde, A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round As one great Furnace flam'd, yet from those flames No light, but rather darkness visible Serv'd only to discover sights of woe, Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace And rest can never dwell, hope never comes That comes to all; but torture without end Still urges, and a fiery Deluge, fed With ever-burning Sulphur unconsum'd: Such place Eternal Justice had prepar'd For those rebellious, here their Prison ordain'd In utter darkness, and their portion set As far remov'd from God and light of Heav'n As from the Center thrice to th' utmost Pole. O how unlike the place from whence they fell! There the companions of his fall, o'rewhelm'd With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire, He soon discerns, and weltring by his side One next himself in power, and next in crime, Long after known in PALESTINE, and nam'd BEELZEBUB. To whom th' Arch-Enemy, And thence in Heav'n call'd Satan, with bold words Breaking the horrid silence thus began. If thou beest he; But O how fall'n! how chang'd From him, who in the happy Realms of Light Cloth'd with transcendent brightnes didst outshine Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league, United thoughts and counsels, equal hope, And hazard in the Glorious Enterprize, Joynd with me once, now misery hath joynd In equal ruin: into what Pit thou seest From what highth fal'n, so much the stronger provd He with his Thunder: and till then who knew The force of those dire Arms? yet not for those Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage Can else inflict do I repent or change, Though chang'd in outward lustre; that fixt mind And high disdain, from sence of injur'd merit, That with the mightiest rais'd me to contend, And to the fierce contention brought along Innumerable force of Spirits arm'd That durst dislike his reign, and me preferring, His utmost power with adverse power oppos'd In dubious Battel on the Plains of Heav'n, And shook his throne. What though the field be lost? All is not lost; the unconquerable Will, And study of revenge, immortal hate, And courage never to submit or yield: And what is else not to be overcome? That Glory never shall his wrath or might Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace With suppliant knee, and deifie his power Who from the terrour of this Arm so late Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed, That were an ignominy and shame beneath This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods And this Empyreal substance cannot fail, Since through experience of this great event In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanc't, We may with more successful hope resolve To wage by force or guile eternal Warr Irreconcileable, to our grand Foe, Who now triumphs, and in th' excess of joy Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heav'n. So spake th' Apostate Angel, though in pain, Vaunting aloud, but rackt with deep despare: And him thus answer'd soon his bold Compeer. O Prince, O Chief of many Throned Powers, That led th' imbattelld Seraphim to Warr Under thy conduct, and in dreadful deeds Fearless, endanger'd Heav'ns perpetual King; And put to proof his high Supremacy, Whether upheld by strength, or Chance, or Fate, Too well I see and rue the dire event, That with sad overthrow and foul defeat Hath lost us Heav'n, and all this mighty Host In horrible destruction laid thus low, As far as Gods and Heav'nly Essences Can Perish: for the mind and spirit remains Invincible, and vigour soon returns, Though all our Glory extinct, and happy state Here swallow'd up in endless misery. But what if he our Conquerour, whom I now Of force believe Almighty, since no less Then such could hav orepow'rd such force as ours Have left us this our spirit and strength intire Strongly to suffer and support our pains, That we may so suffice his vengeful ire, Or do him mightier service as his thralls By right of Warr, what e're his business be Here in the heart of Hell to work in Fire, Or do his Errands in the gloomy Deep; What can it then avail though yet we feel Strength undiminisht, or eternal being To undergo eternal punishment? Whereto with speedy words th' Arch-fiend reply'd. Fall'n Cherube, to be weak is miserable Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure, To do ought good never will be our task, But ever to do ill our sole delight, As being the contrary to his high will Whom we resist. If then his Providence Out of our evil seek to bring forth good, Our labour must be to pervert that end, And out of good still to find means of evil; Which oft times may succeed, so as perhaps Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb His inmost counsels from their destind aim. But see the angry Victor hath recall'd His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit Back to the Gates of Heav'n: The Sulphurous Hail Shot after us in storm, oreblown hath laid The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice Of Heav'n receiv'd us falling, and the Thunder, Wing'd with red Lightning and impetuous rage, Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep. Let us not slip th' occasion, whether scorn, Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe. Seest thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wilde, The seat of desolation, voyd of light, Save what the glimmering of these livid flames Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend From off the tossing of these fiery waves, There rest, if any rest can harbour there, And reassembling our afflicted Powers, Consult how we may henceforth most offend Our Enemy, our own loss how repair, How overcome this dire Calamity, What reinforcement we may gain from Hope, If not what resolution from despare. Thus Satan talking to his neerest Mate With Head up-lift above the wave, and Eyes That sparkling blaz'd, his other Parts besides Prone on the Flood, extended long and large Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge As whom the Fables name of monstrous size, TITANIAN, or EARTH-BORN, that warr'd on JOVE, BRIARIOS or TYPHON, whom the Den By ancient TARSUS held, or that Sea-beast LEVIATHAN, which God of all his works Created hugest that swim th' Ocean stream: Him haply slumbring on the NORWAY foam The Pilot of some small night-founder'd Skiff, Deeming some Island, oft, as Sea-men tell, With fixed Anchor in his skaly rind Moors by his side under the Lee, while Night Invests the Sea, and wished Morn delayes: So stretcht out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay Chain'd on the burning Lake, nor ever thence Had ris'n or heav'd his head, but that the will And high permission of all-ruling Heaven Left him at large to his own dark designs, That with reiterated crimes he might Heap on himself damnation, while he sought Evil to others, and enrag'd might see How all his malice serv'd but to bring forth Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shewn On Man by him seduc't, but on himself Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance pour'd. Forthwith upright he rears from off the Pool His mighty Stature; on each hand the flames Drivn backward slope their pointing spires, & rowld In billows, leave i'th' midst a horrid Vale. Then with expanded wings he stears his flight Aloft, incumbent on the dusky Air That felt unusual weight, till on dry Land He lights, if it were Land that ever burn'd With solid, as the Lake with liquid fire; And such appear'd in hue, as when the force Of subterranean wind transports a Hill Torn from PELORUS, or the shatter'd side Of thundring AETNA, whose combustible And fewel'd entrals thence conceiving Fire, Sublim'd with Mineral fury, aid the Winds, And leave a singed bottom all involv'd With stench and smoak: Such resting found the sole Of unblest feet. Him followed his next Mate, Both glorying to have scap't the STYGIAN flood As Gods, and by their own recover'd strength, Not by the sufferance of supernal Power. Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime, Said then the lost Arch Angel, this the seat That we must change for Heav'n, this mournful gloom For that celestial light? Be it so, since hee Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid What shall be right: fardest from him is best Whom reason hath equald, force hath made supream Above his equals. Farewel happy Fields Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrours, hail Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings A mind not to be chang'd by Place or Time. The mind is its own place, and in it self Can make a Heav'n of Hell, a Hell of Heav'n. What matter where, if I be still the same, And what I should be, all but less then hee Whom Thunder hath made greater? Here at least We shall be free; th' Almighty hath not built Here for his envy, will not drive us hence: Here we may reign secure, and in my choyce To reign is worth ambition though in Hell: Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heav'n. But wherefore let we then our faithful friends, Th' associates and copartners of our loss Lye thus astonisht on th' oblivious Pool, And call them not to share with us their part In this unhappy Mansion, or once more With rallied Arms to try what may be yet Regaind in Heav'n, or what more lost in Hell? So SATAN spake, and him BEELZEBUB Thus answer'd. Leader of those Armies bright, Which but th' Omnipotent none could have foyld, If once they hear that voyce, their liveliest pledge Of hope in fears and dangers, heard so oft In worst extreams, and on the perilous edge Of battel when it rag'd, in all assaults Their surest signal, they will soon resume New courage and revive, though now they lye Groveling and prostrate on yon Lake of Fire, As we erewhile, astounded and amaz'd, No wonder, fall'n such a pernicious highth. He scarce had ceas't when the superiour Fiend Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield Ethereal temper, massy, large and round, Behind him cast; the broad circumference Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose Orb Through Optic Glass the TUSCAN Artist views At Ev'ning from the top of FESOLE, Or in VALDARNO, to descry new Lands, Rivers or Mountains in her spotty Globe. His Spear, to equal which the tallest Pine Hewn on NORWEGIAN hills, to be the Mast Of some great Ammiral, were but a wand, He walkt with to support uneasie steps Over the burning Marle, not like those steps On Heavens Azure, and the torrid Clime Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with Fire; Nathless he so endur'd, till on the Beach Of that inflamed Sea, he stood and call'd His Legions, Angel Forms, who lay intrans't Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strow the Brooks In VALLOMBROSA, where th' ETRURIAN shades High overarch't imbowr; or scatterd sedge Afloat, when with fierce Winds ORION arm'd Hath vext the Red-Sea Coast, whose waves orethrew BUSIRIS and his MEMPHIAN Chivalrie, VVhile with perfidious hatred they pursu'd The Sojourners of GOSHEN, who beheld From the safe shore their floating Carkases And broken Chariot Wheels, so thick bestrown Abject and lost lay these, covering the Flood, Under amazement of their hideous change. He call'd so loud, that all the hollow Deep Of Hell resounded. Princes, Potentates, Warriers, the Flowr of Heav'n, once yours, now lost, If such astonishment as this can sieze Eternal spirits; or have ye chos'n this place After the toyl of Battel to repose Your wearied vertue, for the ease you find To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heav'n? Or in this abject posture have ye sworn To adore the Conquerour? who now beholds Cherube and Seraph rowling in the Flood With scatter'd Arms and Ensigns, till anon His swift pursuers from Heav'n Gates discern Th' advantage, and descending tread us down Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulfe. Awake, arise, or be for ever fall'n. They heard, and were abasht, and up they sprung Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread, Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake. Nor did they not perceave the evil plight In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel; Yet to their Generals Voyce they soon obeyd Innumerable. As when the potent Rod Wav'd round the Coast, up call'd a pitchy cloud Of LOCUSTS, warping on the Eastern Wind, That ore the Realm of impious PHAROAH hung Like Night, and darken'd all the Land of NILE: So numberless were those bad Angels seen Hovering on wing under the Cope of Hell 'Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding Fires; Till, as a signal giv'n, th' uplifted Spear Of their great Sultan waving to direct Thir course, in even ballance down they light On the firm brimstone, and fill all the Plain; A multitude, like which the populous North Pour'd never from her frozen loyns, to pass RHENE or the DANAW, when her barbarous Sons Came like a Deluge on the South, and spread Beneath GIBRALTAR to the LYBIAN sands. Forthwith from every Squadron and each Band The Heads and Leaders thither hast where stood Their great Commander; Godlike shapes and forms Excelling human, Princely Dignities, And Powers that earst in Heaven sat on Thrones; Though of their Names in heav'nly Records now Be no memorial, blotted out and ras'd By thir Rebellion, from the Books of Life. Nor had they yet among the Sons of EVE Got them new Names, till wandring ore the Earth, Through Gods high sufferance for the tryal of man, By falsities and lyes the greatest part Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake God their Creator, and th' invisible Glory of him, that made them, to transform Oft to the Image of a Brute, adorn'd With gay Religions full of Pomp and Gold, And Devils to adore for Deities: Then were they known to men by various Names, And various Idols through the Heathen World. Say, Muse, their Names then known, who first, who last, Rous'd from the slumber, on that fiery Couch, At thir great Emperors call, as next in worth Came singly where he stood on the bare strand, While the promiscuous croud stood yet aloof? The chief were those who from the Pit of Hell Roaming to seek their prey on earth, durst fix Their Seats long after next the Seat of God, Their Altars by his Altar, Gods ador'd Among the Nations round, and durst abide JEHOVAH thundring out of SION, thron'd Between the Cherubim; yea, often plac'd Within his Sanctuary it self their Shrines, Abominations; and with cursed things His holy Rites, and solemn Feasts profan'd, And with their darkness durst affront his light. First MOLOCH, horrid King besmear'd with blood Of human sacrifice, and parents tears, Though for the noyse of Drums and Timbrels loud Their childrens cries unheard, that past through fire To his grim Idol. Him the AMMONITE Worshipt in RABBA and her watry Plain, In ARGOB and in BASAN, to the stream Of utmost ARNON. Nor content with such Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart Of SOLOMON he led by fraud to build His Temple right against the Temple of God On that opprobrious Hill, and made his Grove The pleasant Vally of HINNOM, TOPHET thence And black GEHENNA call'd, the Type of Hell. Next CHEMOS, th' obscene dread of MOABS Sons, From AROER to NEBO, and the wild Of Southmost ABARIM; in HESEBON And HERONAIM, SEONS Realm, beyond The flowry Dale of SIBMA clad with Vines, PEOR his other Name, when he entic'd ISRAEL in SITTIM on their march from NILE To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe. Yet thence his lustful Orgies he enlarg'd Even to that Hill of scandal, by the Grove Of MOLOCH homicide, lust hard by hate; Till good JOSIAH drove them thence to Hell. With these came they, who from the bordring flood Of old EUPHRATES to the Brook that parts Of BAALIM and ASHTAROTH, those male, These Feminine. For Spirits when they please Can either Sex assume, or both; so soft And uncompounded is their Essence pure, Not ti'd or manacl'd with joynt or limb, Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones, Like cumbrous flesh; but in what shape they choose Dilated or condens't, bright or obscure, Can execute their aerie purposes, And works of love or enmity fulfill. For those the Race of ISRAEL oft forsook Their living strength, and unfrequented left His righteous Altar, bowing lowly down To bestial Gods; for which their heads as low Bow'd down in Battel, sunk before the Spear Of despicable foes. With these in troop Came ASTORETH, whom the PHOENICIANS call'd ASTARTE, Queen of Heav'n, with crescent Horns; To whose bright Image nightly by the Moon SIDONIAN Virgins paid their Vows and Songs, In SION also not unsung, where stood Her Temple on th' offensive Mountain, built By that uxorious King, whose heart though large, Beguil'd by fair Idolatresses, fell To Idols foul. THAMMUZ came next behind, Whose annual wound in LEBANON allur'd The SYRIAN Damsels to lament his fate In amorous dittyes all a Summers day, While smooth ADONIS from his native Rock Ran purple to the Sea, suppos'd with blood Of THAMMUZ yearly wounded: the Love-tale Infected SIONS daughters with like heat, Whose wanton passions in the sacred Porch EZEKIEL saw, when by the Vision led His eye survay'd the dark Idolatries Of alienated JUDAH. Next came one Who mourn'd in earnest, when the Captive Ark Maim'd his brute Image, head and hands lopt off In his own Temple, on the grunsel edge, Where he fell flat, and sham'd his Worshipers: And downward Fish: yet had his Temple high Rear'd in AZOTUS, dreaded through the Coast And ACCARON and GAZA's frontier bounds. Him follow'd RIMMON, whose delightful Seat Was fair DAMASCUS, on the fertil Banks Of ABBANA and PHARPHAR, lucid streams. He also against the house of God was bold: A Leper once he lost and gain'd a King, AHAZ his sottish Conquerour, whom he drew Gods Altar to disparage and displace For one of SYRIAN mode, whereon to burn His odious offrings, and adore the Gods Whom he had vanquisht. After these appear'd A crew who under Names of old Renown, OSIRIS, ISIS, ORUS and their Train With monstrous shapes and sorceries abus'd Thir wandring Gods disguis'd in brutish forms Rather then human. Nor did ISRAEL scape Th' infection when their borrow'd Gold compos'd The Calf in OREB: and the Rebel King Doubl'd that sin in BETHEL and in DAN, Lik'ning his Maker to the Grazed Ox, JEHOVAH, who in one Night when he pass'd Both her first born and all her bleating Gods. BELIAL came last, then whom a Spirit more lewd Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love Vice for it self: To him no Temple stood Or Altar smoak'd; yet who more oft then hee In Temples and at Altars, when the Priest Turns Atheist, as did ELY'S Sons, who fill'd With lust and violence the house of God. In Courts and Palaces he also Reigns And in luxurious Cities, where the noyse Of riot ascends above thir loftiest Towrs, And injury and outrage: And when Night Darkens the Streets, then wander forth the Sons Of BELIAL, flown with insolence and wine. Witness the Streets of SODOM, and that night In GIBEAH, when hospitable Dores Yielded thir Matrons to prevent worse rape. These were the prime in order and in might; The rest were long to tell, though far renown'd, Th' IONIAN Gods, of JAVANS Issue held Gods, yet confest later then Heav'n and Earth Thir boasted Parents; TITAN Heav'ns first born With his enormous brood, and birthright seis'd By younger SATURN, he from mightier JOVE His own and RHEA'S Son like measure found; So JOVE usurping reign'd: these first in CREET And IDA known, thence on the Snowy top Of cold OLYMPUS rul'd the middle Air Thir highest Heav'n; or on the DELPHIAN Cliff, Or in DODONA, and through all the bounds Of DORIC Land; or who with SATURN old Fled over ADRIA to th' HESPERIAN Fields, And ore the CELTIC roam'd the utmost Isles. All these and more came flocking; but with looks Down cast and damp, yet such wherein appear'd Obscure som glimps of joy, to have found thir chief Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost In loss it self; which on his count'nance cast Like doubtful hue: but he his wonted pride Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore Semblance of worth not substance, gently rais'd Their fainted courage, and dispel'd their fears. Then strait commands that at the warlike sound Of Trumpets loud and Clarions be upreard His mighty Standard; that proud honour claim'd AZAZEL as his right, a Cherube tall: Who forthwith from the glittering Staff unfurld Th' Imperial Ensign, which full high advanc't Shon like a Meteor streaming to the Wind With Gemms and Golden lustre rich imblaz'd, Seraphic arms and Trophies: all the while Sonorous mettal blowing Martial sounds: At which the universal Host upsent A shout that tore Hells Concave, and beyond Frighted the Reign of CHAOS and old Night. All in a moment through the gloom were seen Ten thousand Banners rise into the Air With Orient Colours waving: with them rose A Forrest huge of Spears: and thronging Helms Appear'd, and serried Shields in thick array Of depth immeasurable: Anon they move In perfect PHALANX to the Dorian mood Of Flutes and soft Recorders; such as rais'd To highth of noblest temper Hero's old Arming to Battel, and in stead of rage Deliberate valour breath'd, firm and unmov'd With dread of death to flight or foul retreat, Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage With solemn touches, troubl'd thoughts, and chase Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they Breathing united force with fixed thought Mov'd on in silence to soft Pipes that charm'd Thir painful steps o're the burnt soyle; and now Advanc't in view they stand, a horrid Front Of dreadful length and dazling Arms, in guise Of Warriers old with order'd Spear and Shield, Awaiting what command thir mighty Chief Had to impose: He through the armed Files Darts his experienc't eye, and soon traverse The whole Battalion views, thir order due, Thir visages and stature as of Gods, Thir number last he summs. And now his heart Distends with pride, and hardning in his strength Glories: For never since created man, Met such imbodied force, as nam'd with these Could merit more then that small infantry Warr'd on by Cranes: though all the Giant brood Of PHLEGRA with th' Heroic Race were joyn'd That fought at THEB'S and ILIUM, on each side Mixt with auxiliar Gods; and what resounds In Fable or ROMANCE of UTHERS Son Begirt with BRITISH and ARMORIC Knights; And all who since, Baptiz'd or Infidel Or whom BISERTA sent from AFRIC shore When CHARLEMAIN with all his Peerage fell By FONTARABBIA. Thus far these beyond Compare of mortal prowess, yet observ'd Thir dread Commander: he above the rest In shape and gesture proudly eminent Stood like a Towr; his form had yet not lost All her Original brightness, nor appear'd Less then Arch Angel ruind, and th' excess Of Glory obscur'd: As when the Sun new ris'n Looks through the Horizontal misty Air Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon In dim Eclips disastrous twilight sheds On half the Nations, and with fear of change Perplexes Monarchs. Dark'n'd so, yet shon Above them all th' Arch Angel: but his face Deep scars of Thunder had intrencht, and care Sat on his faded cheek, but under Browes Of dauntless courage, and considerate Pride Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast Signs of remorse and passion to behold The fellows of his crime, the followers rather Far other once beheld in bliss condemn'd For ever now to have their lot in pain, Millions of Spirits for his fault amerc't Of Heav'n, and from Eternal Splendors flung For his revolt, yet faithfull how they stood, Thir Glory witherd. As when Heavens Fire Hath scath'd the Forrest Oaks, or Mountain Pines, With singed top their stately growth though bare Stands on the blasted Heath. He now prepar'd To speak; whereat their doubl'd Ranks they bend From Wing to Wing, and half enclose him round With all his Peers: attention held them mute. Thrice he assayd, and thrice in spite of scorn, Tears such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last Words interwove with sighs found out their way. O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers Matchless, but with th' Almighty, and that strife Was not inglorious, though th' event was dire, As this place testifies, and this dire change Hateful to utter: but what power of mind Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth Of knowledge past or present, could have fear'd, How such united force of Gods, how such As stood like these, could ever know repulse? For who can yet beleeve, though after loss, That all these puissant Legions, whose exile Hath emptied Heav'n, shall faile to re-ascend Self-rais'd, and repossess their native seat. For me, be witness all the Host of Heav'n, If counsels different, or danger shun'd By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns Monarch in Heav'n, till then as one secure Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute, Consent or custome, and his Regal State Put forth at full, but still his strength conceal'd, Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall. Henceforth his might we know, and know our own So as not either to provoke, or dread New warr, provok't; our better part remains To work in close design, by fraud or guile What force effected not: that he no less At length from us may find, who overcomes By force, hath overcome but half his foe. Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife There went a fame in Heav'n that he ere long Intended to create, and therein plant A generation, whom his choice regard Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven: Thither, if but to prie, shall be perhaps Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere: For this Infernal Pit shall never hold Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaird, For who can think Submission? Warr then, Warr Open or understood must be resolv'd. He spake: and to confirm his words, out-flew Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze Far round illumin'd hell: highly they rag'd Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arm's Clash'd on their sounding shields the din of war, Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heav'n. There stood a Hill not far whose griesly top Belch'd fire and rowling smoak; the rest entire Shon with a glossie scurff, undoubted sign That in his womb was hid metallic Ore, The work of Sulphur. Thither wing'd with speed A numerous Brigad hasten'd. As when bands Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field, Or cast a Rampart. MAMMON led them on, MAMMON, the least erected Spirit that fell From heav'n, for ev'n in heav'n his looks & thoughts Were always downward bent, admiring more The riches of Heav'ns pavement, trod'n Gold, Then aught divine or holy else enjoy'd In vision beatific: by him first Men also, and by his suggestion taught, Ransack'd the Center, and with impious hands Rifl'd the bowels of thir mother Earth For Treasures better hid. Soon had his crew Op'nd into the Hill a spacious wound And dig'd out ribs of Gold. Let none admire That riches grow in Hell; that soyle may best Deserve the pretious bane. And here let those Who boast in mortal things, and wondring tell Of BABEL, and the works of MEMPHIAN Kings, Learn how thir greatest Monuments of Fame, And Strength and Art are easily outdone By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour What in an age they with incessant toyle And hands innumerable scarce perform Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepar'd, That underneath had veins of liquid fire Sluc'd from the Lake, a second multitude With wondrous Art founded the massie Ore, Severing each kinde, and scum'd the Bullion dross: A third as soon had form'd within the ground A various mould, and from the boyling cells By strange conveyance fill'd each hollow nook, As in an Organ from one blast of wind To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths. Anon out of the earth a Fabrick huge Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound Of Dulcet Symphonies and voices sweet, Built like a Temple, where PILASTERS round Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid With Golden Architrave; nor did there want Cornice or Freeze, with bossy Sculptures grav'n, The Roof was fretted Gold. Not BABILON, Nor great ALCAIRO such magnificence Equal'd in all thir glories, to inshrine BELUS or SERAPIS thir Gods, or seat In wealth and luxurie. Th' ascending pile Stood fixt her stately highth, and strait the dores Op'ning thir brazen foulds discover wide Within, her ample spaces, o're the smooth And level pavement: from the arched roof Pendant by suttle Magic many a row Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed With Naphtha and ASPHALTUS yeilded light As from a sky. The hasty multitude Admiring enter'd, and the work some praise And some the Architect: his hand was known In Heav'n by many a Towred structure high, Where Scepter'd Angels held thir residence, And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King Exalted to such power, and gave to rule, Each in his Herarchie, the Orders bright. Nor was his name unheard or unador'd In ancient Greece; and in AUSONIAN land Men call'd him MULCIBER; and how he fell From Heav'n, they fabl'd, thrown by angry JOVE Sheer o're the Chrystal Battlements: from Morn To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve, A Summers day; and with the setting Sun Dropt from the Zenith like a falling Star, On LEMNOS th' AEGAEAN Ile: thus they relate, Erring; for he with this rebellious rout Fell long before; nor aught avail'd him now To have built in Heav'n high Towrs; nor did he scape By all his Engins, but was headlong sent With his industrious crew to build in hell. Mean while the winged Haralds by command Of Sovran power, with awful Ceremony And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim A solemn Councel forthwith to be held At PANDAEMONIUM, the high Capital Of Satan and his Peers: thir summons call'd From every and Band squared Regiment By place or choice the worthiest; they anon With hundreds and with thousands trooping came Attended: all access was throng'd, the Gates And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall Though like a cover'd field, where Champions bold Wont ride in arm'd, and at the Soldans chair Defi'd the best of Panim chivalry To mortal combat or carreer with Lance Thick swarm'd, both on the ground and in the air, Brusht with the hiss of russling wings. As Bees In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides, Poure forth thir populous youth about the Hive In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers Flie to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank, The suburb of thir Straw-built Cittadel, New rub'd with Baume, expatiate and confer Thir State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd Swarm'd and were straitn'd; till the Signal giv'n, Behold a wonder! they but now who seemd In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race Beyond the INDIAN Mount, or Faerie Elves, Whose midnight Revels, by a Forrest side Or Fountain fome belated Peasant sees, Or dreams he sees, while over head the Moon Sits Arbitress, and neerer to the Earth Wheels her pale course, they on thir mirth & dance Intent, with jocond Music charm his ear; At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds. Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms Reduc'd thir shapes immense, and were at large, Though without number still amidst the Hall Of that infernal Court. But far within And in thir own dimensions like themselves The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim In close recess and secret conclave sat A thousand Demy-Gods on golden seat's, Frequent and full. After short silence then And summons read, the great consult began. High on a Throne of Royal State, which far Outshon the wealth of ORMUS and of IND, Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand Showrs on her Kings BARBARIC Pearl & Gold, Satan exalted sat, by merit rais'd To that bad eminence; and from despair Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue Vain Warr with Heav'n, and by success untaught His proud imaginations thus displaid. Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heav'n, For since no deep within her gulf can hold Immortal vigor, though opprest and fall'n, I give not Heav'n for lost. From this descent Celestial vertues rising, will appear More glorious and more dread then from no fall, And trust themselves to fear no second fate: Mee though just right, and the fixt Laws of Heav'n Did first create your Leader, next, free choice, With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight, Hath bin achievd of merit, yet this loss Thus farr at least recover'd, hath much more Establisht in a safe unenvied Throne Yeilded with full consent. The happier state In Heav'n, which follows dignity, might draw Envy from each inferior; but who here Will envy whom the highest place exposes Formost to stand against the Thunderers aime Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share Of endless pain? where there is then no good For which to strive, no strife can grow up there From Faction; for none sure will claim in hell Precedence, none, whose portion is so small Of present pain, that with ambitious mind Will covet more. With this advantage then To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord, More then can be in Heav'n, we now return To claim our just inheritance of old, Surer to prosper then prosperity Could have assur'd us; and by what best way, Whether of open Warr or covert guile, We now debate; who can advise, may speak. He ceas'd, and next him MOLOC, Scepter'd King Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit That fought in Heav'n; now fiercer by despair: His trust was with th' Eternal to be deem'd Equal in strength, and rather then be less Car'd not to be at all; with that care lost Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse He reckd not, and these words thereafter spake. My sentence is for open Warr: Of Wiles, More unexpert, I boast not: them let those Contrive who need, or when they need, not now. For while they sit contriving, shall the rest, Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait The Signal to ascend, sit lingring here Heav'ns fugitives, and for thir dwelling place Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame, By our delay? no, let us rather choose Arm'd with Hell flames and fury all at once O're Heav'ns high Towrs to force resistless way, Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise Of his Almighty Engin he shall hear Black fire and horror shot with equal rage Among his Angels; and his Throne it self Mixt with TARTAREAN Sulphur, and strange fire, His own invented Torments. But perhaps The way seems difficult and steep to scale With upright wing against a higher foe. Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench Of that forgetful Lake benumme not still, That in our proper motion we ascend Up to our native seat: descent and fall To us is adverse. Who but felt of late When the fierce Foe hung on our brok'n Rear Insulting, and pursu'd us through the Deep, With what compulsion and laborious flight We sunk thus low? Th' ascent is easie then; Th' event is fear'd; should we again provoke Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find To our destruction: if there be in Hell Fear to be worse destroy'd: what can be worse Then to dwell here, driv'n out from bliss, condemn'd In this abhorred deep to utter woe; Where pain of unextinguishable fire Must exercise us without hope of end The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge Inexorably, and the torturing houre Calls us to Penance? More destroy'd then thus We should be quite abolisht and expire. What fear we then? what doubt we to incense His utmost ire? which to the highth enrag'd, Will either quite consume us, and reduce To nothing this essential, happier farr Then miserable to have eternal being: Or if our substance be indeed Divine, And cannot cease to be, we are at worst On this side nothing; and by proof we feel Our power sufficient to disturb his Heav'n, And with perpetual inrodes to Allarme, Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne: He ended frowning, and his look denounc'd Desperate revenge, and Battel dangerous To less then Gods. On th' other side up rose BELIAL, in act more graceful and humane; A fairer person lost not Heav'n; he seemd For dignity compos'd and high exploit: But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue Dropt Manna, and could make the worse appear The better reason, to perplex and dash Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low; To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds Timorous and slothful: yet he pleas'd the eare, And with perswasive accent thus began. I should be much for open Warr, O Peers, As not behind in hate; if what was urg'd Main reason to perswade immediate Warr, Did not disswade me most, and seem to cast Ominous conjecture on the whole success: When he who most excels in fact of Arms, In what he counsels and in what excels Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair And utter dissolution, as the scope Of all his aim, after some dire revenge. First, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heav'n are fill'd With Armed watch, that render all access Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep Encamp thir Legions, or with obscure wing Scout farr and wide into the Realm of night, Scorning surprize. Or could we break our way By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise With blackest Insurrection, to confound Heav'ns purest Light, yet our great Enemie All incorruptible would on his Throne Sit unpolluted, and th' Ethereal mould Incapable of stain would soon expel Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire Victorious. Thus repuls'd, our final hope Is flat despair: we must exasperate Th' Almighty Victor to spend all his rage, And that must end us, that must be our cure, To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose, Though full of pain, this intellectual being, Those thoughts that wander through Eternity, To perish rather, swallowd up and lost In the wide womb of uncreated night, Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows, Let this be good, whether our angry Foe Can give it, or will ever? how he can Is doubtful; that he never will is sure. Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire, Belike through impotence, or unaware, To give his Enemies thir wish, and end Them in his anger, whom his anger saves To punish endless? wherefore cease we then? Say they who counsel Warr, we are decreed, Reserv'd and destin'd to Eternal woe; Whatever doing, what can we suffer more, What can we suffer worse? is this then worst, Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms? What when we fled amain, pursu'd and strook With Heav'ns afflicting Thunder, and besought The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seem'd A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay Chain'd on the burning Lake? that sure was worse. What if the breath that kindl'd those grim fires Awak'd should blow them into sevenfold rage And plunge us in the Flames? or from above Should intermitted vengeance Arme again His red right hand to plague us? what if all Her stores were op'n'd, and this Firmament Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire, Impendent horrors, threatning hideous fall One day upon our heads; while we perhaps Designing or exhorting glorious Warr, Caught in a fierie Tempest shall be hurl'd Each on his rock transfixt, the sport and prey Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk Under yon boyling Ocean, wrapt in Chains; There to converse with everlasting groans, Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd, Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse. Warr therefore, open or conceal'd, alike My voice disswades; for what can force or guile With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye Views all things at one view? he from heav'ns highth All these our motions vain, sees and derides; Not more Almighty to resist our might Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles. Shall we then live thus vile, the race of Heav'n Thus trampl'd, thus expell'd to suffer here Chains & these Torments? better these then worse By my advice; since fate inevitable The Victors will. To suffer, as to doe, Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust That so ordains: this was at first resolv'd, If we were wise, against so great a foe Contending, and so doubtful what might fall. I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold And vent'rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear What yet they know must follow, to endure Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain, The sentence of thir Conquerour: This is now Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear, Our Supream Foe in time may much remit His anger, and perhaps thus farr remov'd Not mind us not offending, satisfi'd With what is punish't; whence these raging fires Will slack'n, if his breath stir not thir flames. Our purer essence then will overcome Thir noxious vapour, or enur'd not feel, Or chang'd at length, and to the place conformd In temper and in nature, will receive Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain; This horror will grow milde, this darkness light, Besides what hope the never-ending flight Of future days may bring, what chance, what change Worth waiting, since our present lot appeers For happy though but ill, for ill not worst, If we procure not to our selves more woe. Thus BELIAL with words cloath'd in reasons garb Counsel'd ignoble ease, and peaceful sloath, Not peace: and after him thus MAMMON spake. Either to disinthrone the King of Heav'n We warr, if warr be best, or to regain Our own right lost: him to unthrone we then May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yeild To fickle Chance, and CHAOS judge the strife: The former vain to hope argues as vain The latter: for what place can be for us Within Heav'ns bound, unless Heav'ns Lord supream We overpower? Suppose he should relent And publish Grace to all, on promise made Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we Stand in his presence humble, and receive Strict Laws impos'd, to celebrate his Throne With warbl'd Hymns, and to his Godhead sing Forc't Halleluiah's; while he Lordly sits Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes Our servile offerings. This must be our task In Heav'n, this our delight; how wearisom Eternity so spent in worship paid To whom we hate. Let us not then pursue By force impossible, by leave obtain'd Unacceptable, though in Heav'n, our state Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek Our own good from our selves, and from our own Live to our selves, though in this vast recess, Free, and to none accountable, preferring Hard liberty before the easie yoke Of servile Pomp. Our greatness will appear Then most conspicuous, when great things of small, Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse We can create, and in what place so e're Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain Through labour and endurance. This deep world Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst Thick clouds and dark doth Heav'ns all-ruling Sire Choose to reside, his Glory unobscur'd, And with the Majesty of darkness round Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar Must'ring thir rage, and Heav'n resembles Hell? As he our Darkness, cannot we his Light Imitate when we please? This Desart soile Wants not her hidden lustre, Gemms and Gold; Nor want we skill or art, from whence to raise Magnificence; and what can Heav'n shew more? Our torments also may in length of time Become our Elements, these piercing Fires As soft as now severe, our temper chang'd Into their temper; which must needs remove The sensible of pain. All things invite To peaceful Counsels, and the settl'd State Of order, how in safety best we may Compose our present evils, with regard Of what we are and where, dismissing quite All thoughts of Warr: ye have what I advise. He scarce had finisht, when such murmur filld Th' Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain The sound of blustring winds, which all night long Had rous'd the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull Sea-faring men orewatcht, whose Bark by chance Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay After the Tempest: Such applause was heard As MAMMON ended, and his Sentence pleas'd, Advising peace: for such another Field They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear Of Thunder and the Sword of MICHAEL Wrought still within them; and no less desire To found this nether Empire, which might rise By pollicy, and long process of time, In emulation opposite to Heav'n. Which when BEELZEBUB perceiv'd, then whom, SATAN except, none higher sat, with grave Aspect he rose, and in his rising seem'd A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven Deliberation sat and publick care; And Princely counsel in his face yet shon, Majestick though in ruin: sage he stood With ATLANTEAN shoulders fit to bear The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look Drew audience and attention still as Night Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake. Thrones and imperial Powers, off-spring of heav'n, Ethereal Vertues; or these Titles now Must we renounce, and changing stile be call'd Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote Inclines, here to continue, and build up here A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream, And know not that the King of Heav'n hath doom'd This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt From Heav'ns high jurisdiction, in new League Banded against his Throne, but to remaine In strictest bondage, though thus far remov'd, Under th' inevitable curb, reserv'd His captive multitude: For he, be sure, In highth or depth, still first and last will Reign Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part By our revolt, but over Hell extend His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule Us here, as with his Golden those in Heav'n. What sit we then projecting Peace and Warr? Warr hath determin'd us, and foild with loss Irreparable; tearms of peace yet none Voutsaf't or sought; for what peace will be giv'n To us enslav'd, but custody severe, And stripes, and arbitrary punishment Inflicted? and what peace can we return, But to our power hostility and hate, Untam'd reluctance, and revenge though slow, Yet ever plotting how the Conquerour least May reap his conquest, and may least rejoyce In doing what we most in suffering feel? Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need With dangerous expedition to invade Heav'n, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege, Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find Some easier enterprize? There is a place If ancient and prophetic fame in Heav'n Err not another World, the happy seat Of som new Race call'd MAN, about this time To be created like to us, though less In power and excellence, but favour'd more Of him who rules above; so was his will Pronounc'd among the Gods, and by an Oath, That shook Heav'ns whol circumference, confirm'd. Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn What creatures there inhabit, of what mould, Or substance, how endu'd, and what thir Power, And where thir weakness, how attempted best, By force or suttlety: Though Heav'n be shut, And Heav'ns high Arbitrator sit secure In his own strength, this place may lye expos'd The utmost border of his Kingdom, left To their defence who hold it: here perhaps Som advantagious act may be achiev'd By sudden onset, either with Hell fire To waste his whole Creation, or possess All as our own, and drive as we were driven, The punie habitants, or if not drive, Seduce them to our Party, that thir God May prove thir foe, and with repenting hand Abolish his own works. This would surpass Common revenge, and interrupt his joy In our Confusion, and our Joy upraise In his disturbance; when his darling Sons Hurl'd headlong to partake with us, shall curse Thir frail Originals, and faded bliss, Faded so soon. Advise if this be worth Attempting, or to sit in darkness here Hatching vain Empires. Thus BEELZEBUB Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devis'd By SATAN, and in part propos'd: for whence, But from the Author of all ill could Spring So deep a malice, to confound the race Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell To mingle and involve, done all to spite The great Creatour? But thir spite still serves His glory to augment. The bold design Pleas'd highly those infernal States, and joy Sparkl'd in all thir eyes; with full assent They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews. Well have ye judg'd, well ended long debate, Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are, Great things resolv'd; which from the lowest deep Will once more lift us up, in spight of Fate, Neerer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms And opportune excursion we may chance Re-enter Heav'n; or else in some milde Zone Dwell not unvisited of Heav'ns fair Light Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air, To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires Shall breath her balme. But first whom shall we send In search of this new world, whom shall we find Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandring feet The dark unbottom'd infinite Abyss And through the palpable obscure find out His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight Upborn with indefatigable wings Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive The happy Ile; what strength, what art can then Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe Through the strict Senteries and Stations thick Of Angels watching round? Here he had need All circumspection, and we now no less Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send, The weight of all and our last hope relies. This said, he sat; and expectation held His look suspence, awaiting who appeer'd To second, or oppose, or undertake The perilous attempt: but all sat mute, Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; & each In others count'nance red his own dismay Astonisht: none among the choice and prime Of those Heav'n-warring Champions could be found So hardie as to proffer or accept Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last SATAN, whom now transcendent glory rais'd Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride Conscious of highest worth, unmov'd thus spake. O Progeny of Heav'n, Empyreal Thrones, With reason hath deep silence and demurr Seis'd us, though undismaid: long is the way And hard, that out of Hell leads up to Light; Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire, Outrageous to devour, immures us round Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant Barr'd over us prohibit all egress. These past, if any pass, the void profound Of unessential Night receives him next Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being Threatens him, plung'd in that abortive gulf. If thence he scape into what ever world, Or unknown Region, what remains him less Then unknown dangers and as hard escape. But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers, And this Imperial Sov'ranty, adorn'd With splendor, arm'd with power, if aught propos'd And judg'd of public moment, in the shape Of difficulty or danger could deterre Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign, Refusing to accept as great a share Of hazard as of honour, due alike To him who Reigns, and so much to him due Of hazard more, as he above the rest High honourd sits? Go therfore mighty powers, Terror of Heav'n, though fall'n; intend at home, While here shall be our home, what best may ease The present misery, and render Hell More tollerable; if there be cure or charm To respite or deceive, or slack the pain Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek Deliverance for us all: this enterprize None shall partake with me. Thus saying rose The Monarch, and prevented all reply, Prudent, least from his resolution rais'd Others among the chief might offer now Certain to be refus'd what erst they feard; And so refus'd might in opinion stand His rivals, winning cheap the high repute Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they Dreaded not more th' adventure then his voice Forbidding; and at once with him they rose; Thir rising all at once was as the sound Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend With awful reverence prone; and as a God Extoll him equal to the highest in Heav'n: Nor fail'd they to express how much they prais'd, That for the general safety he despis'd His own: for neither do the Spirits damn'd Loose all thir vertue; least bad men should boast Thir specious deeds on earth, which glory excites, Or close ambition varnisht o're with zeal. Thus they thir doubtful consultations dark Ended rejoycing in thir matchless Chief: As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, o'respread Heav'ns chearful face, the lowring Element Scowls ore the dark'nd lantskip Snow, or showre; If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet Extend his ev'ning beam, the fields revive, The birds thir notes renew, and bleating herds Attest thir joy, that hill and valley rings. O shame to men! Devil with Devil damn'd Firm concord holds, men onely disagree Of Creatures rational, though under hope Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace, Yet live in hatred, enmitie, and strife Among themselves, and levie cruel warres, Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy: As if which might induce us to accord Man had not hellish foes anow besides, That day and night for his destruction waite. The STYGIAN Councel thus dissolv'd; and forth In order came the grand infernal Peers, Midst came thir mighty Paramount, and seemd Alone th' Antagonist of Heav'n, nor less Then Hells dread Emperour with pomp Supream, And God-like imitated State; him round A Globe of fierie Seraphim inclos'd With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms. Then of thir Session ended they bid cry With Trumpets regal sound the great result: Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim Put to thir mouths the sounding Alchymie By Haralds voice explain'd: the hollow Abyss Heard farr and wide, and all the host of Hell With deafning shout, return'd them loud acclaim. Thence more at ease thir minds and somwhat rais'd By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers Disband, and wandring, each his several way Pursues, as inclination or sad choice Leads him perplext, where he may likeliest find Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain The irksome hours, till his great Chief return. Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime Upon the wing, or in swift race contend, As at th' Olympian Games or PYTHIAN fields; Part curb thir fierie Steeds, or shun the Goal With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form. As when to warn proud Cities warr appears Wag'd in the troubl'd Skie, and Armies rush To Battel in the Clouds, before each Van Pric forth the Aerie Knights, and couch thir spears Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms From either end of Heav'n the welkin burns. Others with vast TYPHOEAN rage more fell Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar. As when ALCIDES from OEALIA Crown'd With conquest, felt th' envenom'd robe, and tore Through pain up by the roots THESSALIAN Pines, And LICHAS from the top of OETA threw Into th' EUBOIC Sea. Others more milde, Retreated in a silent valley, sing With notes Angelical to many a Harp Thir own Heroic deeds and hapless fall By doom of Battel; and complain that Fate Free Vertue should enthrall to Force or Chance. Thir song was partial, but the harmony What could it less when Spirits immortal sing? Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense, Others apart sat on a Hill retir'd, In thoughts more elevate, and reason'd high Fixt Fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute, And found no end, in wandring mazes lost. Of good and evil much they argu'd then, Of happiness and final misery, Passion and Apathie, and glory and shame, Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophie: Yet with a pleasing sorcerie could charm Pain for a while or anguish, and excite Fallacious hope, or arm th' obdured brest With stubborn patience as with triple steel. Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands, On bold adventure to discover wide That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps Might yeild them easier habitation, bend Four ways thir flying March, along the Banks Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge Into the burning Lake thir baleful streams; Abhorred STYX the flood of deadly hate, Sad ACHERON of sorrow, black and deep; COCYTUS, nam'd of lamentation loud Heard on the ruful stream; fierce PHLEGETON Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage. Farr off from these a slow and silent stream, LETHE the River of Oblivion roules Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks, Forthwith his former state and being forgets, Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain. Beyond this flood a frozen Continent Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice, A gulf profound as that SERBONIAN Bog Betwixt DAMIATA and mount CASIUS old, Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air Burns frore, and cold performs th' effect of Fire. Thither by harpy-footed Furies hail'd, At certain revolutions all the damn'd Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change Of fierce extreams, extreams by change more fierce, From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice Thir soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine Immovable, infixt, and frozen round, Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire. They ferry over this LETHEAN Sound Both to and fro, thir sorrow to augment, And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe, All in one moment, and so neer the brink; But fate withstands, and to oppose th' attempt MEDUSA with GORGONIAN terror guards The Ford, and of it self the water flies All taste of living wight, as once it fled The lip of TANTALUS. Thus roving on In confus'd march forlorn, th' adventrous Bands With shuddring horror pale, and eyes agast View'd first thir lamentable lot, and found No rest: through many a dark and drearie Vaile They pass'd, and many a Region dolorous, O're many a Frozen, many a Fierie Alpe, Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death, A Universe of death, which God by curse Created evil, for evil only good, Where all life dies, death lives, and nature breeds, Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things, Abominable, inutterable, and worse Then Fables yet have feign'd, or fear conceiv'd, Mean while the Adversary of God and Man, SATAN with thoughts inflam'd of highest design, Puts on swift wings, and toward the Gates of Hell Explores his solitary flight; som times He scours the right hand coast, som times the left, Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soares Up to the fiery concave touring high. As when farr off at Sea a Fleet descri'd Hangs in the Clouds, by AEQUINOCTIAL Winds Close sailing from BENGALA, or the Iles Of TERNATE and TIDORE, whence Merchants bring Thir spicie Drugs: they on the trading Flood Through the wide ETHIOPIAN to the Cape Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole. So seem'd Farr off the flying Fiend: at last appeer Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof, And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock, Impenitrable, impal'd with circling fire, Yet unconsum'd. Before the Gates there sat On either side a formidable shape; The one seem'd Woman to the waste, and fair, But ended foul in many a scaly fould Voluminous and vast, a Serpent arm'd With mortal sting: about her middle round A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing bark'd With wide CERBEREAN mouths full loud, and rung A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep, If aught disturb'd thir noyse, into her woomb, And kennel there, yet there still bark'd and howl'd Within unseen. Farr less abhorrd then these Vex'd SCYLLA bathing in the Sea that parts CALABRIA from the hoarce TRINACRIAN shore: Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when call'd In secret, riding through the Air she comes Lur'd with the smell of infant blood, to dance With LAPLAND Witches, while the labouring Moon Eclipses at thir charms. The other shape, If shape it might be call'd that shape had none Distinguishable in member, joynt, or limb, Or substance might be call'd that shadow seem'd, For each seem'd either; black it stood as Night, Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell, And shook a dreadful Dart; what seem'd his head The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on. SATAN was now at hand, and from his seat The Monster moving onward came as fast, With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode. Th' undaunted Fiend what this might be admir'd, Admir'd, not fear'd; God and his Son except, Created thing naught vallu'd he nor shun'd; And with disdainful look thus first began. Whence and what art thou, execrable shape, That dar'st, though grim and terrible, advance Thy miscreated Front athwart my way To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass, That be assur'd, without leave askt of thee: Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof, Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heav'n. To whom the Goblin full of wrauth reply'd, Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou hee, Who first broke peace in Heav'n and Faith, till then Unbrok'n, and in proud rebellious Arms Drew after him the third part of Heav'ns Sons Conjur'd against the highest, for which both Thou And they outcast from God, are here condemn'd To waste Eternal daies in woe and pain? And reck'n'st thou thy self with Spirits of Heav'n, Hell-doomd, and breath'st defiance here and scorn, Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more, Thy King and Lord? Back to thy punishment, False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings, Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue Thy lingring, or with one stroke of this Dart Strange horror seise thee, and pangs unfelt before. So spake the grieslie terrour, and in shape, So speaking and so threatning, grew ten fold More dreadful and deform: on th' other side Incenc't with indignation SATAN stood Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burn'd, That fires the length of OPHIUCUS huge In th' Artick Sky, and from his horrid hair Level'd his deadly aime; thir fatall hands No second stroke intend, and such a frown Each cast at th' other, as when two black Clouds With Heav'ns Artillery fraught, come rattling on Over the CASPIAN, then stand front to front Hov'ring a space, till Winds the signal blow To joyn thir dark Encounter in mid air: So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell Grew darker at thir frown, so matcht they stood; For never but once more was either like To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds Had been achiev'd, whereof all Hell had rung, Had not the Snakie Sorceress that sat Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key, Ris'n, and with hideous outcry rush'd between. O Father, what intends thy hand, she cry'd, Against thy only Son? What fury O Son, Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart Against thy Fathers head? and know'st for whom; For him who sits above and laughs the while At thee ordain'd his drudge, to execute What e're his wrath, which he calls Justice, bids, His wrath which one day will destroy ye both. She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest Forbore, then these to her SATAN return'd: So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange Thou interposest, that my sudden hand Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds What it intends; till first I know of thee, What thing thou art, thus double-form'd, and why In this infernal Vaile first met thou call'st Me Father, and that Fantasm call'st my Son? I know thee not, nor ever saw till now Sight more detestable then him and thee. T' whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate reply'd; Hast thou forgot me then, and do I seem Now in thine eye so foul, once deemd so fair In Heav'n, when at th' Assembly, and in sight Of all the Seraphim with thee combin'd In bold conspiracy against Heav'ns King, All on a sudden miserable pain Surpris'd thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie swumm In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast Threw forth, till on the left side op'ning wide, Likest to thee in shape and count'nance bright, Then shining heav'nly fair, a Goddess arm'd Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seis'd All th' Host of Heav'n; back they recoild affraid At first, and call'd me SIN, and for a Sign Portentous held me; but familiar grown, I pleas'd, and with attractive graces won The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing Becam'st enamour'd, and such joy thou took'st With me in secret, that my womb conceiv'd A growing burden. Mean while Warr arose, And fields were fought in Heav'n; wherein remaind For what could else to our Almighty Foe Cleer Victory, to our part loss and rout Through all the Empyrean: down they fell Driv'n headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down Into this Deep, and in the general fall I also; at which time this powerful Key Into my hand was giv'n, with charge to keep These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass Without my op'ning. Pensive here I sat Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes. At last this odious offspring whom thou seest Thine own begotten, breaking violent way Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew Transform'd: but he my inbred enemie Forth issu'd, brandishing his fatal Dart Made to destroy: I fled, and cry'd out DEATH; Hell trembl'd at the hideous Name, and sigh'd From all her Caves, and back resounded DEATH. I fled, but he pursu'd though more, it seems, Inflam'd with lust then rage and swifter far, Me overtook his mother all dismaid, And in embraces forcible and foule Ingendring with me, of that rape begot These yelling Monsters that with ceasless cry Surround me, as thou sawst, hourly conceiv'd And hourly born, with sorrow infinite To me, for when they list into the womb That bred them they return, and howle and gnaw My Bowels, their repast; then bursting forth Afresh with conscious terrours vex me round, That rest or intermission none I find. Before mine eyes in opposition sits Grim DEATH my Son and foe, who sets them on, And me his Parent would full soon devour For want of other prey, but that he knows His end with mine involvd; and knows that I Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane, When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounc'd. But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope To be invulnerable in those bright Arms, Though temper'd heav'nly, for that mortal dint, Save he who reigns above, none can resist. She finish'd, and the suttle Fiend his lore Soon learnd, now milder, and thus answerd smooth. Dear Daughter, since thou claim'st me for thy Sire, And my fair Son here showst me, the dear pledge Of dalliance had with thee in Heav'n, and joys Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change Befalln us unforeseen, unthought of, know I come no enemie, but to set free From out this dark and dismal house of pain, Both him and thee, and all the heav'nly Host Of Spirits that in our just pretenses arm'd Fell with us from on high: from them I go This uncouth errand sole, and one for all My self expose, with lonely steps to tread Th' unfounded deep, & through the void immense To search with wandring quest a place foretold Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now Created vast and round, a place of bliss In the Pourlieues of Heav'n, and therein plac't A race of upstart Creatures, to supply Perhaps our vacant room, though more remov'd, Least Heav'n surcharg'd with potent multitude Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught Then this more secret now design'd, I haste To know, and this once known, shall soon return, And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen Wing silently the buxom Air, imbalm'd With odours; there ye shall be fed and fill'd Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey. He ceas'd, for both seemd highly pleasd, and Death Grinnd horrible a gastly smile, to hear His famine should be fill'd, and blest his mawe Destin'd to that good hour: no less rejoyc'd His mother bad, and thus bespake her Sire. The key of this infernal Pit by due, And by command of Heav'ns all-powerful King I keep, by him forbidden to unlock These Adamantine Gates; against all force Death ready stands to interpose his dart, Fearless to be o'rematcht by living might. But what ow I to his commands above Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down Into this gloom of TARTARUS profound, To sit in hateful Office here confin'd, Inhabitant of Heav'n, and heav'nlie-born, Here in perpetual agonie and pain, With terrors and with clamors compasst round Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed: Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou My being gav'st me; whom should I obey But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon To that new world of light and bliss, among The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems Thy daughter and thy darling, without end. Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key, Sad instrument of all our woe, she took; And towards the Gate rouling her bestial train, Forthwith the huge Porcullis high up drew, Which but her self not all the STYGIAN powers Could once have mov'd; then in the key-hole turns Th' intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar Of massie Iron or sollid Rock with ease Unfast'ns: on a sudden op'n flie With impetuous recoile and jarring sound Th' infernal dores, and on thir hinges great Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook Of EREBUS. She op'nd, but to shut Excel'd her power; the Gates wide op'n stood, That with extended wings a Bannerd Host Under spread Ensigns marching might pass through With Horse and Chariots rankt in loose array; So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth Cast forth redounding smoak and ruddy flame. Before thir eyes in sudden view appear The secrets of the hoarie deep, a dark Illimitable Ocean without bound, Without dimension, where length, breadth, and highth, And time and place are lost; where eldest Night And CHAOS, Ancestors of Nature, hold Eternal ANARCHIE, amidst the noise Of endless warrs and by confusion stand. For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battel bring Thir embryon Atoms; they around the flag Of each his faction, in thir several Clanns, Light-arm'd or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow, Swarm populous, unnumber'd as the Sands Of BARCA or CYRENE'S torrid soil, Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise Thir lighter wings. To whom these most adhere, Hee rules a moment; CHAOS Umpire sits, And by decision more imbroiles the fray By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter CHANCE governs all. Into this wilde Abyss, The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave, Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire, But all these in thir pregnant causes mixt Confus'dly, and which thus must ever fight, Unless th' Almighty Maker them ordain His dark materials to create more Worlds, Into this wilde Abyss the warie fiend Stood on the brink of Hell and look'd a while, Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith He had to cross. Nor was his eare less peal'd With noises loud and ruinous to compare Great things with small then when BELLONA storms, With all her battering Engines bent to rase Som Capital City, or less then if this frame Of Heav'n were falling, and these Elements In mutinie had from her Axle torn The stedfast Earth. At last his Sail-broad Vannes He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoak Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets A vast vacuitie: all unawares Fluttring his pennons vain plumb down he drops Ten thousand fadom deep, and to this hour Down had been falling, had not by ill chance The strong rebuff of som tumultuous cloud Instinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him As many miles aloft: that furie stay'd, Quencht in a Boggie SYRTIS, neither Sea, Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd on he fares, Treading the crude consistence, half on foot, Half flying; behoves him now both Oare and Saile. As when a Gryfon through the Wilderness With winged course ore Hill or moarie Dale, Pursues the ARIMASPIAN, who by stelth Had from his wakeful custody purloind The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare, With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way, And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flyes: At length a universal hubbub wilde Of stunning sounds and voices all confus'd Born through the hollow dark assaults his eare With loudest vehemence: thither he plyes, Undaunted to meet there what ever power Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask Which way the neerest coast of darkness lyes Bordering on light; when strait behold the Throne Of CHAOS, and his dark Pavilion spread Wide on the wasteful Deep; with him Enthron'd Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things, The consort of his Reign; and by them stood ORCUS and ADES, and the dreaded name Of DEMOGORGON; Rumor next and Chance, And Tumult and Confusion all imbroild, And Discord with a thousand various mouths. T' whom SATAN turning boldly, thus. Ye Powers And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss, CHAOS and ANCIENT NIGHT, I come no Spie, With purpose to explore or to disturb The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint Wandring this darksome desart, as my way Lies through your spacious Empire up to light, Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek What readiest path leads where your gloomie bounds Confine with Heav'n; or if som other place From your Dominion won, th' Ethereal King Possesses lately, thither to arrive I travel this profound, direct my course; Directed, no mean recompence it brings To your behoof, if I that Region lost, All usurpation thence expell'd, reduce To her original darkness and your sway Which is my present journey and once more Erect the Standerd there of ANCIENT NIGHT; Yours be th' advantage all, mine the revenge. Thus SATAN; and him thus the Anarch old With faultring speech and visage incompos'd Answer'd. I know thee, stranger, who thou art, That mighty leading Angel, who of late Made head against Heav'ns King, though overthrown. I saw and heard, for such a numerous host Fled not in silence through the frighted deep With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout, Confusion worse confounded; and Heav'n Gates Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands Pursuing. I upon my Frontieres here Keep residence; if all I can will serve, That little which is left so to defend Encroacht on still through our intestine broiles Weakning the Scepter of old Night: first Hell Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath; Now lately Heaven and Earth, another World Hung ore my Realm, link'd in a golden Chain To that side Heav'n from whence your Legions fell: If that way be your walk, you have not farr; So much the neerer danger; goe and speed; Havock and spoil and ruin are my gain. He ceas'd; and SATAN staid not to reply, But glad that now his Sea should find a shore, With fresh alacritie and force renew'd Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire Into the wilde expanse, and through the shock Of fighting Elements, on all sides round Environ'd wins his way; harder beset And more endanger'd, then when ARGO pass'd Through BOSPORUS betwixt the justling Rocks: Or when ULYSSES on the Larbord shunnd CHARYBDIS, and by th' other whirlpool steard. So he with difficulty and labour hard Mov'd on, with difficulty and labour hee; But hee once past, soon after when man fell, Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain Following his track, such was the will of Heav'n, Pav'd after him a broad and beat'n way Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf Tamely endur'd a Bridge of wondrous length From Hell continu'd reaching th' utmost Orbe Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse With easie intercourse pass to and fro To tempt or punish mortals, except whom God and good Angels guard by special grace. But now at last the sacred influence Of light appears, and from the walls of Heav'n Shoots farr into the bosom of dim Night A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins Her fardest verge, and CHAOS to retire As from her outmost works a brok'n foe With tumult less and with less hostile din, That SATAN with less toil, and now with ease Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn; Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air, Weighs his spread wings, at leasure to behold Farr off th' Empyreal Heav'n, extended wide In circuit, undetermind square or round, With Opal Towrs and Battlements adorn'd Of living Saphire, once his native Seat; And fast by hanging in a golden Chain This pendant world, in bigness as a Starr Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon. Thither full fraught with mischievous revenge, Accurst, and in a cursed hour he hies. HAil holy light, ofspring of Heav'n first-born, Or of th' Eternal Coeternal beam May I express thee unblam'd? since God is light, And never but in unapproached light Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee, Bright effluence of bright essence increate. Or hear'st thou rather pure Ethereal stream, Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun, Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice Of God, as with a Mantle didst invest The rising world of waters dark and deep, Won from the void and formless infinite. Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing, Escap't the STYGIAN Pool, though long detain'd In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight Through utter and through middle darkness borne With other notes then to th' ORPHEAN Lyre Taught by the heav'nly Muse to venture down The dark descent, and up to reascend, Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe, And feel thy sovran vital Lamp; but thou Revisit'st not these eyes, that rowle in vain To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn; So thick a drop serene hath quencht thir Orbs, Or dim suffusion veild. Yet not the more Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt Cleer Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill, Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief Thee SION and the flowrie Brooks beneath That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow, Nightly I visit: nor somtimes forget Those other two equal'd with me in Fate, So were I equal'd with them in renown, And TIRESIAS and PHINEUS Prophets old. Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid Tunes her nocturnal Note. Thus with the Year Seasons return, but not to me returns Day, or the sweet approach of Ev'n or Morn, Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose, Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine; But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark Surrounds me, from the chearful waies of men Cut off, and for the book of knowledg fair Presented with a Universal blanc Of Natures works to mee expung'd and ras'd, And wisdome at one entrance quite shut out. So much the rather thou Celestial light Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell Of things invisible to mortal sight. Now had the Almighty Father from above, From the pure Empyrean where he sits High Thron'd above all highth, bent down his eye, His own works and their works at once to view: Stood thick as Starrs, and from his sight receiv'd Beatitude past utterance; on his right The radiant image of his Glory sat, His onely Son; On Earth he first beheld Our two first Parents, yet the onely two Of mankind, in the happie Garden plac't, Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love, Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love In blissful solitude; he then survey'd Hell and the Gulf between, and SATAN there Coasting the wall of Heav'n on this side Night In the dun Air sublime, and ready now To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet On the bare outside of this World, that seem'd Firm land imbosom'd without Firmament, Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air. Him God beholding from his prospect high, Wherein past, present, future he beholds, Thus to his onely Son foreseeing spake. Onely begotten Son, seest thou what rage Transports our adversarie, whom no bounds Prescrib'd, no barrs of Hell, nor all the chains Heapt on him there, nor yet the main Abyss Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems On desperat revenge, that shall redound Upon his own rebellious head. And now Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way Not farr off Heav'n, in the Precincts of light, Directly towards the new created World, And Man there plac't, with purpose to assay If him by force he can destroy, or worse, By som false guile pervert; and shall pervert; For man will heark'n to his glozing lyes, And easily transgress the sole Command, Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall Hee and his faithless Progenie: whose fault? Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee All he could have; I made him just and right, Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall. Such I created all th' Ethereal Powers And Spirits, both them who stood & them who faild; Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell. Not free, what proof could they have givn sincere Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love, Where onely what they needs must do, appeard, Not what they would? what praise could they receive? What pleasure I from such obedience paid, When Will and Reason Reason also is choice Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild, Made passive both, had servd necessitie, Not mee. They therefore as to right belongd, So were created, nor can justly accuse Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate; As if Predestination over-rul'd Thir will, dispos'd by absolute Decree Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed Thir own revolt, not I: if I foreknew, Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, Which had no less prov'd certain unforeknown. So without least impulse or shadow of Fate, Or aught by me immutablie foreseen, They trespass, Authors to themselves in all Both what they judge and what they choose; for so I formd them free, and free they must remain, Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain'd Thir freedom, they themselves ordain'd thir fall. The first sort by thir own suggestion fell, Self-tempted, self-deprav'd: Man falls deceiv'd By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace, The other none: in Mercy and Justice both, Through Heav'n and Earth, so shall my glorie excel, But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine. Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill'd All Heav'n, and in the blessed Spirits elect Sense of new joy ineffable diffus'd: Beyond compare the Son of God was seen Most glorious, in him all his Father shon Substantially express'd, and in his face Divine compassion visibly appeerd, Love without end, and without measure Grace, Which uttering thus he to his Father spake. O Father, gracious was that word which clos'd Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace; For which both Heav'n and Earth shall high extoll Thy praises, with th' innumerable sound Of Hymns and sacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne Encompass'd shall resound thee ever blest. For should Man finally be lost, should Man Thy creature late so lov'd, thy youngest Son Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd With his own folly? that be from thee farr, That farr be from thee, Father, who art Judge Of all things made, and judgest onely right. Or shall the Adversarie thus obtain His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfill His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught, Or proud return though to his heavier doom, Yet with revenge accomplish't and to Hell Draw after him the whole Race of mankind, By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self Abolish thy Creation, and unmake, For him, what for thy glorie thou hast made? So should thy goodness and thy greatness both Be questiond and blaspheam'd without defence. To whom the great Creatour thus reply'd. O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief delight, Son of my bosom, Son who art alone My word, my wisdom, and effectual might, All hast thou spok'n as my thoughts are, all As my Eternal purpose hath decreed: Man shall not quite be lost, but sav'd who will, Yet not of will in him, but grace in me Freely voutsaft; once more I will renew His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthrall'd By sin to foul exorbitant desires; Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand On even ground against his mortal foe, By me upheld, that he may know how frail His fall'n condition is, and to me ow All his deliv'rance, and to none but me. Some I have chosen of peculiar grace Elect above the rest; so is my will: The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd Thir sinful state, and to appease betimes Th' incensed Deitie, while offerd grace Invites; for I will cleer thir senses dark, What may suffice, and soft'n stonie hearts To pray, repent, and bring obedience due. To prayer, repentance, and obedience due, Though but endevord with sincere intent, Mine eare shall not be slow, mine eye not shut. And I will place within them as a guide My Umpire CONSCIENCE, whom if they will hear, Light after light well us'd they shall attain, And to the end persisting, safe arrive. This my long sufferance and my day of grace They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste; But hard be hard'nd, blind be blinded more, That they may stumble on, and deeper fall; And none but such from mercy I exclude. But yet all is not don; Man disobeying, Disloyal breaks his fealtie, and sinns Against the high Supremacie of Heav'n, Affecting God-head, and so loosing all, To expiate his Treason hath naught left, But to destruction sacred and devote, He with his whole posteritie must die, Die hee or Justice must; unless for him Som other able, and as willing, pay The rigid satisfaction, death for death. Say Heav'nly Powers, where shall we find such love, Which of ye will be mortal to redeem Mans mortal crime, and just th' unjust to save, Dwels in all Heaven charitie so deare? He ask'd, but all the Heav'nly Quire stood mute, And silence was in Heav'n: on mans behalf Patron or Intercessor none appeerd, Much less that durst upon his own head draw The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set. And now without redemption all mankind Must have bin lost, adjudg'd to Death and Hell By doom severe, had not the Son of God, In whom the fulness dwels of love divine, His dearest mediation thus renewd. Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace; And shall grace not find means, that finds her way, The speediest of thy winged messengers, To visit all thy creatures, and to all Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought, Happie for man, so coming; he her aide Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost; Attonement for himself or offering meet, Indebted and undon, hath none to bring: Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life I offer, on mee let thine anger fall; Account mee man; I for his sake will leave Thy bosom, and this glorie next to thee Freely put off, and for him lastly die Well pleas'd, on me let Death wreck all his rage; Under his gloomie power I shall not long Lie vanquisht; thou hast givn me to possess Life in my self for ever, by thee I live, Though now to Death I yeild, and am his due All that of me can die, yet that debt paid, Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsom grave His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soule For ever with corruption there to dwell; But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue My Vanquisher, spoild of his vanted spoile; Death his deaths wound shall then receive, & stoop Inglorious, of his mortall sting disarm'd. I through the ample Air in Triumph high Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show The powers of darkness bound. Thou at the sight Pleas'd, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile, While by thee rais'd I ruin all my Foes, Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave: Then with the multitude of my redeemd Shall enter Heaven long absent, and returne, Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud Of anger shall remain, but peace assur'd, And reconcilement; wrauth shall be no more Thenceforth, but in thy presence Joy entire. His words here ended, but his meek aspect Silent yet spake, and breath'd immortal love To mortal men, above which only shon Filial obedience: as a sacrifice Glad to be offer'd, he attends the will Of his great Father. Admiration seis'd All Heav'n, what this might mean, & whither tend Wondring; but soon th' Almighty thus reply'd: O thou in Heav'n and Earth the only peace Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou My sole complacence! well thou know'st how dear, To me are all my works, nor Man the least Though last created, that for him I spare Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save, By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost. Thou therefore whom thou only canst redeeme, Thir Nature also to thy Nature joyne; And be thy self Man among men on Earth, Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed, By wondrous birth: Be thou in ADAMS room The Head of all mankind, though ADAMS Son. As in him perish all men, so in thee As from a second root shall be restor'd, As many as are restor'd, without thee none. His crime makes guiltie all his Sons, thy merit Imputed shall absolve them who renounce Thir own both righteous and unrighteous deeds, And live in thee transplanted, and from thee Receive new life. So Man, as is most just, Shall satisfie for Man, be judg'd and die, And dying rise, and rising with him raise His Brethren, ransomd with his own dear life. So Heav'nly love shal outdoo Hellish hate, Giving to death, and dying to redeeme, So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate So easily destroy'd, and still destroyes In those who, when they may, accept not grace. Nor shalt thou by descending to assume Mans Nature, less'n or degrade thine owne. Because thou hast, though Thron'd in highest bliss Equal to God, and equally enjoying God-like fruition, quitted all to save A World from utter loss, and hast been found By Merit more then Birthright Son of God, Found worthiest to be so by being Good, Farr more then Great or High; because in thee Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds, Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne; Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reigne Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man, Anointed universal King; all Power I give thee, reign for ever, and assume Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supream Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce: All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell; When thou attended gloriously from Heav'n Shalt in the Skie appeer, and from thee send The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaime Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Windes The living, and forthwith the cited dead Of all past Ages to the general Doom Shall hast'n, such a peal shall rouse thir sleep. Then all thy Saints assembl'd, thou shalt judge Bad men and Angels, they arraignd shall sink Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full, Thenceforth shall be for ever shut. Mean while The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring New Heav'n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell And after all thir tribulations long See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds, With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth. Then thou thy regal Scepter shalt lay by, For regal Scepter then no more shall need, God shall be All in All. But all ye Gods, Adore him, who to compass all this dies, Adore the Son, and honour him as mee. No sooner had th' Almighty ceas't, but all The multitude of Angels with a shout Loud as from numbers without number, sweet As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heav'n rung With Jubilee, and loud Hosanna's fill'd Th' eternal Regions: lowly reverent Towards either Throne they bow, & to the ground With solemn adoration down they cast Thir Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold, Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once In Paradise, fast by the Tree of Life Began to bloom, but soon for mans offence To Heav'n remov'd where first it grew, there grows, And flours aloft shading the Fount of Life, And where the river of Bliss through midst of Heavn Rowls o're ELISIAN Flours her Amber stream; With these that never fade the Spirits Elect Bind thir resplendent locks inwreath'd with beams, Now in loose Garlands thick thrown off, the bright Pavement that like a Sea of Jasper shon Impurpl'd with Celestial Roses smil'd. Then Crown'd again thir gold'n Harps they took, Harps ever tun'd, that glittering by their side Like Quivers hung, and with Praeamble sweet Of charming symphonie they introduce Thir sacred Song, and waken raptures high; No voice exempt, no voice but well could joine Melodious part, such concord is in Heav'n. Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent, Eternal King; thee Author of all being, Fountain of Light, thy self invisible Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit'st Thron'd inaccessible, but when thou shad'st The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine, Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appeer, Yet dazle Heav'n, that brightest Seraphim Approach not, but with both wings veil thir eyes. Thee next they sang of all Creation first, In whose conspicuous count'nance, without cloud Made visible, th' Almighty Father shines, Whom else no Creature can behold; on thee Impresst the effulgence of his Glorie abides, Transfus'd on thee his ample Spirit rests. Hee Heav'n of Heavens and all the Powers therein By thee created, and by thee threw down Th' aspiring Dominations: thou that day Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder didst not spare, Nor stop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that shook Heav'ns everlasting Frame, while o're the necks Thou drov'st of warring Angels disarraid. Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaime Thee only extold, Son of thy Fathers might, To execute fierce vengeance on his foes, Not so on Man; him through their malice fall'n, Father of Mercie and Grace, thou didst not doome So strictly, but much more to pitie encline: No sooner did thy dear and onely Son Perceive thee purpos'd not to doom frail Man So strictly, but much more to pitie enclin'd, He to appease thy wrauth, and end the strife Of Mercy and Justice in thy face discern'd, Regardless of the Bliss wherein hee sat Second to thee, offerd himself to die For mans offence. O unexampl'd love, Love no where to be found less then Divine! Shall be the copious matter of my Song Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy praise Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoine. Thus they in Heav'n, above the starry Sphear, Thir happie hours in joy and hymning spent. Mean while upon the firm opacous Globe Of this round World, whose first convex divides The luminous inferior Orbs, enclos'd From CHAOS and th' inroad of Darkness old, SATAN alighted walks: a Globe farr off It seem'd, now seems a boundless Continent Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night Starless expos'd, and ever-threatning storms Of CHAOS blustring round, inclement skie; Save on that side which from the wall of Heav'n Though distant farr som small reflection gaines Of glimmering air less vext with tempest loud: Here walk'd the Fiend at large in spacious field. As when a Vultur on IMAUS bred, Whose snowie ridge the roving TARTAR bounds, Dislodging from a Region scarce of prey To gorge the flesh of Lambs or yeanling Kids On Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs But in his way lights on the barren plaines With Sails and Wind thir canie Waggons light: So on this windie Sea of Land, the Fiend Walk'd up and down alone bent on his prey, Alone, for other Creature in this place Living or liveless to be found was none, None yet, but store hereafter from the earth Up hither like Aereal vapours flew Of all things transitorie and vain, when Sin With vanity had filld the works of men: Both all things vain, and all who in vain things Built thir fond hopes of Glorie or lasting fame, Or happiness in this or th' other life; All who have thir reward on Earth, the fruits Of painful Superstition and blind Zeal, Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find Fit retribution, emptie as thir deeds; All th' unaccomplisht works of Natures hand, Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixt, Dissolvd on earth, fleet hither, and in vain, Till final dissolution, wander here, Not in the neighbouring Moon, as some have dreamd; Those argent Fields more likely habitants, Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold Betwixt th' Angelical and Human kinde: Hither of ill-joynd Sons and Daughters born First from the ancient World those Giants came With many a vain exploit, though then renownd: The builders next of BABEL on the Plain Of SENNAAR, and still with vain designe New BABELS, had they wherewithall, would build: Others came single; hee who to be deemd A God, leap'd fondly into AETNA flames, EMPEDOCLES, and hee who to enjoy PLATO'S ELYSIUM, leap'd into the Sea, CLEOMBROTUS, and many more too long, White, Black and Grey, with all thir trumperie. Here Pilgrims roam, that stray'd so farr to seek In GOLGOTHA him dead, who lives in Heav'n; And they who to be sure of Paradise Dying put on the weeds of DOMINIC, Or in FRANCISCAN think to pass disguis'd; They pass the Planets seven, and pass the fixt, And that Crystalline Sphear whose ballance weighs The Trepidation talkt, and that first mov'd; And now Saint PETER at Heav'ns Wicket seems To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot Of Heav'ns ascent they lift thir Feet, when loe A violent cross wind from either Coast Blows them transverse ten thousand Leagues awry Into the devious Air; then might ye see Cowles, Hoods and Habits with thir wearers tost And flutterd into Raggs, then Reliques, Beads, The sport of Winds: all these upwhirld aloft Fly o're the backside of the World farr off Into a LIMBO large and broad, since calld The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown Long after, now unpeopl'd, and untrod; All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he pass'd, And long he wanderd, till at last a gleame Of dawning light turnd thither-ward in haste His travell'd steps; farr distant hee descries Ascending by degrees magnificent Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high, At top whereof, but farr more rich appeerd The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate Imbellisht, thick with sparkling orient Gemmes The Portal shon, inimitable on Earth By Model, or by shading Pencil drawn. The Stairs were such as whereon JACOB saw Angels ascending and descending, bands Of Guardians bright, when he from ESAU fled To PADAN-ARAM in the field of LUZ, Dreaming by night under the open Skie, And waking cri'd, This is the Gate of Heav'n. Each Stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood There alwaies, but drawn up to Heav'n somtimes Viewless, and underneath a bright Sea flow'd Of Jasper, or of liquid Pearle, whereon Who after came from Earth, sayling arriv'd, Wafted by Angels, or flew o're the Lake Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds. The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare The Fiend by easie ascent, or aggravate His sad exclusion from the dores of Bliss. Direct against which op'nd from beneath, Just o're the blissful seat of Paradise, A passage down to th' Earth, a passage wide, Wider by farr then that of after-times Over Mount SION, and, though that were large, Over the PROMIS'D LAND to God so dear, By which, to visit oft those happy Tribes, On high behests his Angels to and fro Pass'd frequent, and his eye with choice regard From PANEAS the fount of JORDANS flood So wide the op'ning seemd, where bounds were set To darkness, such as bound the Ocean wave. SATAN from hence now on the lower stair That scal'd by steps of Gold to Heav'n Gate Looks down with wonder at the sudden view Of all this World at once. As when a Scout Through dark and desart wayes with peril gone All night; at last by break of chearful dawne Obtains the brow of some high-climbing Hill, Which to his eye discovers unaware The goodly prospect of some forein land First-seen, or some renownd Metropolis With glistering Spires and Pinnacles adornd, Which now the Rising Sun guilds with his beams. Such wonder seis'd, though after Heaven seen, The Spirit maligne, but much more envy seis'd At sight of all this World beheld so faire. Round he surveys, and well might, where he stood So high above the circling Canopie Of Nights extended shade; from Eastern Point Of LIBRA to the fleecie Starr that bears Beyond th' HORIZON; then from Pole to Pole He views in bredth, and without longer pause Down right into the Worlds first Region throws His flight precipitant, and windes with ease Through the pure marble Air his oblique way Amongst innumerable Starrs, that shon Stars distant, but nigh hand seemd other Worlds, Or other Worlds they seemd, or happy Iles, Like those HESPERIAN Gardens fam'd of old, Fortunate Fields, and Groves and flourie Vales, Thrice happy Iles, but who dwelt happy there He stayd not to enquire: above them all The golden Sun in splendor likest Heaven Allur'd his eye: Thither his course he bends Through the calm Firmament; but up or downe By center, or eccentric, hard to tell, Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie Alooff the vulgar Constellations thick, That from his Lordly eye keep distance due, Dispenses Light from farr; they as they move Thir Starry dance in numbers that compute Days, months, and years, towards his all-chearing Lamp Turn swift their various motions, or are turnd By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms The Univers, and to each inward part With gentle penetration, though unseen, Shoots invisible vertue even to the deep: So wondrously was set his Station bright. There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps Astronomer in the Sun's lucent Orbe Through his glaz'd Optic Tube yet never saw. The place he found beyond expression bright, Compar'd with aught on Earth, Medal or Stone; Not all parts like, but all alike informd With radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire; If mettal, part seemd Gold, part Silver cleer; If stone, Carbuncle most or Chrysolite, Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that shon In AARONS Brest-plate, and a stone besides Imagind rather oft then elsewhere seen, That stone, or like to that which here below Philosophers in vain so long have sought, In vain, though by thir powerful Art they binde Volatil HERMES, and call up unbound In various shapes old PROTEUS from the Sea, Draind through a Limbec to his Native forme. What wonder then if fields and regions here Breathe forth ELIXIR pure, and Rivers run Potable Gold, when with one vertuous touch Th' Arch-chimic Sun so farr from us remote Produces with Terrestrial Humor mixt Here in the dark so many precious things Of colour glorious and effect so rare? Here matter new to gaze the Devil met Undazl'd, farr and wide his eye commands, For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade, But all Sun-shine, as when his Beams at Noon Culminate from th' AEQUATOR, as they now Shot upward still direct, whence no way round Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Aire, No where so cleer, sharp'nd his visual ray To objects distant farr, whereby he soon Saw within kenn a glorious Angel stand, The same whom JOHN saw also in the Sun: His back was turnd, but not his brightness hid; Of beaming sunnie Raies, a golden tiar Circl'd his Head, nor less his Locks behind Illustrious on his Shoulders fledge with wings Lay waving round; on som great charge imploy'd Hee seemd, or fixt in cogitation deep. Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope To find who might direct his wandring flight To Paradise the happie seat of Man, His journies end and our beginning woe. But first he casts to change his proper shape, Which else might work him danger or delay: And now a stripling Cherube he appeers, Not of the prime, yet such as in his face Youth smil'd Celestial, and to every Limb Sutable grace diffus'd, so well he feignd; Under a Coronet his flowing haire In curles on either cheek plaid, wings he wore Of many a colourd plume sprinkl'd with Gold, His habit fit for speed succinct, and held Before his decent steps a Silver wand. He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright, Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turnd, Admonisht by his eare, and strait was known Th' Arch-Angel URIEL, one of the seav'n Who in Gods presence, neerest to his Throne Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes That run through all the Heav'ns, or down to th' Earth Bear his swift errands over moist and dry, O're Sea and Land: him SATAN thus accostes; URIEL, for thou of those seav'n Spirits that stand In sight of God's high Throne, gloriously bright, The first art wont his great authentic will Interpreter through highest Heav'n to bring, Where all his Sons thy Embassie attend; And here art likeliest by supream decree Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye To visit oft this new Creation round; Unspeakable desire to see, and know All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man, His chief delight and favour, him for whom All these his works so wondrous he ordaind, Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim Alone thus wandring. Brightest Seraph tell In which of all these shining Orbes hath Man His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none, But all these shining Orbes his choice to dwell; That I may find him, and with secret gaze, Or open admiration him behold On whom the great Creator hath bestowd Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces powrd; That both in him and all things, as is meet, The Universal Maker we may praise; Who justly hath drivn out his Rebell Foes To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss Created this new happie Race of Men To serve him better: wise are all his wayes. So spake the false dissembler unperceivd; For neither Man nor Angel can discern Hypocrisie, the only evil that walks Invisible, except to God alone, By his permissive will, through Heav'n and Earth: And oft though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps At wisdoms Gate, and to simplicitie Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguil'd URIEL, though Regent of the Sun, and held The sharpest sighted Spirit of all in Heav'n; Who to the fraudulent Impostor foule In his uprightness answer thus returnd. Faire Angel, thy desire which tends to know The works of God, thereby to glorifie The great Work-Maister, leads to no excess That reaches blame, but rather merits praise The more it seems excess, that led thee hither From thy Empyreal Mansion thus alone, To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps Contented with report heare onely in heav'n: For wonderful indeed are all his works, Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all Had in remembrance alwayes with delight; But what created mind can comprehend Thir number, or the wisdom infinite That brought them forth, but hid thir causes deep. I saw when at his Word the formless Mass, This worlds material mould, came to a heap: Confusion heard his voice, and wilde uproar Stood rul'd, stood vast infinitude confin'd; Till at his second bidding darkness fled, Light shon, and order from disorder sprung: Swift to thir several Quarters hasted then The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Aire, Fire, And this Ethereal quintessence of Heav'n Flew upward, spirited with various forms, That rowld orbicular, and turnd to Starrs Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move; Each had his place appointed, each his course, The rest in circuit walles this Universe. Look downward on that Globe whose hither side With light from hence, though but reflected, shines; That place is Earth the seat of Man, that light His day, which else as th' other Hemisphere Night would invade, but there the neighbouring Moon So call that opposite fair Starr her aide Timely interposes, and her monthly round Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heav'n; With borrowd light her countenance triform Hence fills and empties to enlighten th' Earth, And in her pale dominion checks the night. That spot to which I point is PARADISE, ADAMS abode, those loftie shades his Bowre. Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires. Thus said, he turnd, and SATAN bowing low, As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven, Where honour due and reverence none neglects, Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath, Down from th' Ecliptic, sped with hop'd success, Throws his steep flight with many an Aerie wheele, Nor staid, till on NIPHATES top he lights. O For that warning voice, which he who saw Th' APOCALYPS, heard cry in Heaven aloud, Then when the Dragon, put to second rout, Came furious down to be reveng'd on men, While time was, our first Parents had bin warnd The coming of thir secret foe, and scap'd Haply so scap'd his mortal snare; for now SATAN, now first inflam'd with rage, came down, The Tempter ere th' Accuser of man-kind, To wreck on innocent frail man his loss Of that first Battel, and his flight to Hell: Yet not rejoycing in his speed, though bold, Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast, Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth Now rowling, boiles in his tumultuous brest, And like a devillish Engine back recoiles Upon himself; horror and doubt distract His troubl'd thoughts, and from the bottom stirr The Hell within him, for within him Hell He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell One step no more then from himself can fly By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair That slumberd, wakes the bitter memorie Of what he was, what is, and what must be Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue. Sometimes towards EDEN which now in his view Lay pleasant, his grievd look he fixes sad, Sometimes towards Heav'n and the full-blazing Sun, Which now sat high in his Meridian Towre: Then much revolving, thus in sighs began. O thou that with surpassing Glory crownd, Look'st from thy sole Dominion like the God Of this new World; at whose sight all the Starrs Hide thir diminisht heads; to thee I call, But with no friendly voice, and add thy name O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams That bring to my remembrance from what state I fell, how glorious once above thy Spheare; Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down Warring in Heav'n against Heav'ns matchless King: Ah wherefore! he deservd no such return From me, whom he created what I was In that bright eminence, and with his good Upbraided none; nor was his service hard. What could be less then to afford him praise, The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks, How due! yet all his good prov'd ill in me, And wrought but malice; lifted up so high I sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher Would set me highest, and in a moment quit The debt immense of endless gratitude, So burthensome, still paying, still to ow; Forgetful what from him I still receivd, And understood not that a grateful mind By owing owes not, but still pays, at once Indebted and dischargd; what burden then? O had his powerful Destiny ordaind Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais'd Ambition. Yet why not? som other Power As great might have aspir'd, and me though mean Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great Fell not, but stand unshak'n, from within Or from without, to all temptations arm'd. Hadst thou the same free Will and Power to stand? Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse, But Heav'ns free Love dealt equally to all? Be then his Love accurst, since love or hate, To me alike, it deals eternal woe. Nay curs'd be thou; since against his thy will Chose freely what it now so justly rues. Me miserable! which way shall I flie Infinite wrauth, and infinite despaire? Which way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell; And in the lowest deep a lower deep Still threatning to devour me opens wide, To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heav'n. O then at last relent: is there no place Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left? None left but by submission; and that word DISDAIN forbids me, and my dread of shame Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc'd With other promises and other vaunts Then to submit, boasting I could subdue Th' Omnipotent. Ay me, they little know How dearly I abide that boast so vaine, Under what torments inwardly I groane; While they adore me on the Throne of Hell, With Diadem and Scepter high advanc'd The lower still I fall, onely Supream In miserie; such joy Ambition findes. But say I could repent and could obtaine By Act of Grace my former state; how soon Would highth recal high thoughts, how soon unsay What feign'd submission swore: ease would recant Vows made in pain, as violent and void. For never can true reconcilement grow Where wounds of deadly hate have peirc'd so deep: Which would but lead me to a worse relapse And heavier fall: so should I purchase deare Short intermission bought with double smart. This knows my punisher; therefore as farr From granting hee, as I from begging peace: All hope excluded thus, behold in stead Of us out-cast, exil'd, his new delight, Mankind created, and for him this World. So farwel Hope, and with Hope farwel Fear, Farwel Remorse: all Good to me is lost; Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least Divided Empire with Heav'ns King I hold By thee, and more then half perhaps will reigne; As Man ere long, and this new World shall know. Thus while he spake, each passion dimm'd his face Thrice chang'd with pale, ire, envie and despair, Which marrd his borrow'd visage, and betraid Him counterfet, if any eye beheld. For heav'nly mindes from such distempers foule Are ever cleer. Whereof hee soon aware, Each perturbation smooth'd with outward calme, Artificer of fraud; and was the first That practisd falshood under saintly shew, Deep malice to conceale, couch't with revenge: Yet not anough had practisd to deceive URIEL once warnd; whose eye pursu'd him down The way he went, and on th' ASSYRIAN mount Saw him disfigur'd, more then could befall Spirit of happie sort: his gestures fierce He markd and mad demeanour, then alone, As he suppos'd, all unobserv'd, unseen. So on he fares, and to the border comes Of EDEN, where delicious Paradise, Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green, As with a rural mound the champain head Of a steep wilderness, whose hairie sides With thicket overgrown, grottesque and wilde, Access deni'd; and over head up grew Insuperable highth of loftiest shade, Cedar, and Pine, and Firr, and branching Palm, A Silvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend Shade above shade, a woodie Theatre Of stateliest view. Yet higher then thir tops The verdurous wall of Paradise up sprung: Which to our general Sire gave prospect large Into his neather Empire neighbouring round. And higher then that Wall a circling row Of goodliest Trees loaden with fairest Fruit, Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue Appeerd, with gay enameld colours mixt: On which the Sun more glad impress'd his beams Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow, When God hath showrd the earth; so lovely seemd That Lantskip: And of pure now purer aire Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires Vernal delight and joy, able to drive All sadness but despair: now gentle gales Fanning thir odoriferous wings dispense Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole Those balmie spoiles. As when to them who saile Beyond the CAPE OF HOPE, and now are past MOZAMBIC, off at Sea North-East windes blow SABEAN Odours from the spicie shoare Of ARABIE the blest, with such delay Well pleas'd they slack thir course, and many a League Cheard with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles. So entertaind those odorous sweets the Fiend Who came thir bane, though with them better pleas'd Then ASMODEUS with the fishie fume, That drove him, though enamourd, from the Spouse Of TOBITS Son, and with a vengeance sent Now to th' ascent of that steep savage Hill SATAN had journied on, pensive and slow; But further way found none, so thick entwin'd, As one continu'd brake, the undergrowth Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplext All path of Man or Beast that past that way: One Gate there onely was, and that look'd East On th' other side: which when th' arch-fellon saw Due entrance he disdaind, and in contempt, At one slight bound high overleap'd all bound Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within Lights on his feet. As when a prowling Wolfe, Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey, Watching where Shepherds pen thir Flocks at eeve In hurdl'd Cotes amid the field secure, Leaps o're the fence with ease into the Fould: Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial dores, Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault, In at the window climbes, or o're the tiles; So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fould: So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climbe. Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life, The middle Tree and highest there that grew, Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life Thereby regaind, but sat devising Death To them who liv'd; nor on the vertue thought Of that life-giving Plant, but only us'd For prospect, what well us'd had bin the pledge Of immortalitie. So little knows Any, but God alone, to value right The good before him, but perverts best things To worst abuse, or to thir meanest use. Beneath him with new wonder now he views To all delight of human sense expos'd In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more, A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise Of God the Garden was, by him in the East Of EDEN planted; EDEN stretchd her Line From AURAN Eastward to the Royal Towrs Of great SELEUCIA, built by GRECIAN Kings, Or where the Sons of EDEN long before Dwelt in TELASSAR: in this pleasant soile His farr more pleasant Garden God ordaind; Out of the fertil ground he caus'd to grow All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste; And all amid them stood the Tree of Life, High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life Our Death the Tree of Knowledge grew fast by, Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill. Southward through EDEN went a River large, Nor chang'd his course, but through the shaggie hill Pass'd underneath ingulft, for God had thrown That Mountain as his Garden mould high rais'd Upon the rapid current, which through veins Of porous Earth with kindly thirst up drawn, Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill Waterd the Garden; thence united fell Down the steep glade, and met the neather Flood, Which from his darksom passage now appeers, And now divided into four main Streams, Runs divers, wandring many a famous Realme And Country whereof here needs no account, But rather to tell how, if Art could tell, How from that Saphire Fount the crisped Brooks, Rowling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold, With mazie error under pendant shades Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice Art In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon Powrd forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plaine, Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote The open field, and where the unpierc't shade Imbround the noontide Bowrs: Thus was this place, A happy rural seat of various view; Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and Balme, Others whose fruit burnisht with Golden Rinde Hung amiable, HESPERIAN Fables true, If true, here onely, and of delicious taste: Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs, and Flocks Grasing the tender herb, were interpos'd, Or palmie hilloc, or the flourie lap Of som irriguous Valley spread her store, Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose: Another side, umbrageous Grots and Caves Of coole recess, o're which the mantling Vine Layes forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall Down the slope hills, disperst, or in a Lake, That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crownd, Her chrystall mirror holds, unite thir streams. The Birds thir quire apply; aires, vernal aires, Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune The trembling leaves, while Universal PAN Knit with the GRACES and the HOURS in dance Led on th' Eternal Spring. Not that faire field Of ENNA, where PROSERPIN gathring flours Her self a fairer Floure by gloomie DIS Was gatherd, which cost CERES all that pain To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove Of DAPHNE by ORONTES, and th' inspir'd CASTALIAN Spring might with this Paradise Of EDEN strive; nor that NYSEIAN Ile Girt with the River TRITON, where old CHAM, Whom Gentiles AMMON call and LIBYAN JOVE, Hid AMALTHEA and her Florid Son Young BACCHUS from his Stepdame RHEA'S eye; Nor where ABASSIN Kings thir issue Guard, Mount AMARA, though this by som suppos'd True Paradise under the ETHIOP Line By NILUS head, enclos'd with shining Rock, A whole dayes journey high, but wide remote From this ASSYRIAN Garden, where the Fiend Saw undelighted all delight, all kind Of living Creatures new to sight and strange: Two of far nobler shape erect and tall, Godlike erect, with native Honour clad In naked Majestie seemd Lords of all, And worthie seemd, for in thir looks Divine The image of thir glorious Maker shon, Truth, Wisdome, Sanctitude severe and pure, Severe, but in true filial freedom plac't; Whence true autoritie in men; though both Not equal, as thir sex not equal seemd; For contemplation hee and valour formd, For softness shee and sweet attractive Grace, Hee for God only, shee for God in him: His fair large Front and Eye sublime declar'd Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks Round from his parted forelock manly hung Clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad: Shee as a vail down to the slender waste Her unadorned golden tresses wore Dissheveld, but in wanton ringlets wav'd As the Vine curles her tendrils, which impli'd Subjection, but requir'd with gentle sway, And by her yeilded, by him best receivd, Yeilded with coy submission, modest pride, And sweet reluctant amorous delay. Nor those mysterious parts were then conceald, Then was not guiltie shame, dishonest shame Of natures works, honor dishonorable, Sin-bred, how have ye troubl'd all mankind With shews instead, meer shews of seeming pure, And banisht from mans life his happiest life, Simplicitie and spotless innocence. So passd they naked on, nor shund the sight Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill: So hand in hand they passd, the lovliest pair That ever since in loves imbraces met, ADAM the goodliest man of men since borne His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters EVE. Under a tuft of shade that on a green Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side They sat them down, and after no more toil Of thir sweet Gardning labour then suffic'd To recommend coole ZEPHYR, and made ease More easie, wholsom thirst and appetite More grateful, to thir Supper Fruits they fell, Nectarine Fruits which the compliant boughes Yeilded them, side-long as they sat recline On the soft downie Bank damaskt with flours: The savourie pulp they chew, and in the rinde Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream; Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles Wanted, nor youthful dalliance as beseems Fair couple, linkt in happie nuptial League, Alone as they. About them frisking playd All Beasts of th' Earth, since wilde, and of all chase Sporting the Lion rampd, and in his paw Dandl'd the Kid; Bears, Tygers, Ounces, Pards Gambold before them, th' unwieldy Elephant To make them mirth us'd all his might, & wreathd His Lithe Proboscis; close the Serpent sly Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine His breaded train, and of his fatal guile Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass Coucht, and now fild with pasture gazing sat, Or Bedward ruminating: for the Sun Declin'd was hasting now with prone carreer To th' Ocean Iles, and in th' ascending Scale Of Heav'n the Starrs that usher Evening rose: When SATAN still in gaze, as first he stood, Scarce thus at length faild speech recoverd sad. O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold, Into our room of bliss thus high advanc't Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps, Not Spirits, yet to heav'nly Spirits bright Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue With wonder, and could love, so lively shines In them Divine resemblance, and such grace The hand that formd them on thir shape hath pourd. Ah gentle pair, yee little think how nigh Your change approaches, when all these delights Will vanish and deliver ye to woe, More woe, the more your taste is now of joy; Happie, but for so happie ill secur'd Long to continue, and this high seat your Heav'n Ill fenc't for Heav'n to keep out such a foe As now is enterd; yet no purpos'd foe To you whom I could pittie thus forlorne Though I unpittied: League with you I seek, And mutual amitie so streight, so close, That I with you must dwell, or you with me Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such Accept your Makers work; he gave it me, Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfould, To entertain you two, her widest Gates, And send forth all her Kings; there will be room, Not like these narrow limits, to receive Your numerous ofspring; if no better place, Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge On you who wrong me not for him who wrongd. And should I at your harmless innocence Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just, Honour and Empire with revenge enlarg'd, By conquering this new World, compels me now To do what else though damnd I should abhorre. So spake the Fiend, and with necessitie, The Tyrants plea, excus'd his devilish deeds. Then from his loftie stand on that high Tree Down he alights among the sportful Herd Of those fourfooted kindes, himself now one, Now other, as thir shape servd best his end Neerer to view his prey, and unespi'd To mark what of thir state he more might learn By word or action markt: about them round A Lion now he stalkes with fierie glare, Then as a Tiger, who by chance hath spi'd In some Purlieu two gentle Fawnes at play, Strait couches close, then rising changes oft His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground Whence rushing he might surest seise them both Grip't in each paw: when ADAM first of men To first of women EVE thus moving speech, Turnd him all eare to heare new utterance flow. Sole partner and sole part of all these joyes, Dearer thy self then all; needs must the Power That made us, and for us this ample World Be infinitly good, and of his good As liberal and free as infinite, That rais'd us from the dust and plac't us here In all this happiness, who at his hand Have nothing merited, nor can performe Aught whereof hee hath need, hee who requires From us no other service then to keep This one, this easie charge, of all the Trees In Paradise that beare delicious fruit So various, not to taste that onely Tree Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life, So neer grows Death to Life, what ere Death is, Som dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowst God hath pronounc't it death to taste that Tree, The only sign of our obedience left Among so many signes of power and rule Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv'n Over all other Creatures that possesse Earth, Aire, and Sea. Then let us not think hard One easie prohibition, who enjoy Free leave so large to all things else, and choice Unlimited of manifold delights: But let us ever praise him, and extoll His bountie, following our delightful task To prune these growing Plants, & tend these Flours, Which were it toilsom, yet with thee were sweet. To whom thus Eve repli'd. O thou for whom And from whom I was formd flesh of thy flesh, And without whom am to no end, my Guide And Head, what thou hast said is just and right. For wee to him indeed all praises owe, And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy So farr the happier Lot, enjoying thee Preeminent by so much odds, while thou Like consort to thy self canst no where find. That day I oft remember, when from sleep I first awak't, and found my self repos'd Under a shade on flours, much wondring where And what I was, whence thither brought, and how. Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound Of waters issu'd from a Cave and spread Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmov'd Pure as th' expanse of Heav'n; I thither went With unexperienc't thought, and laid me downe On the green bank, to look into the cleer Smooth Lake, that to me seemd another Skie. As I bent down to look, just opposite, A Shape within the watry gleam appeerd Bending to look on me, I started back, It started back, but pleasd I soon returnd, Pleas'd it returnd as soon with answering looks Of sympathie and love, there I had fixt Mine eyes till now, and pin'd with vain desire, Had not a voice thus warnd me, What thou seest, What there thou seest fair Creature is thy self, With thee it came and goes: but follow me, And I will bring thee where no shadow staies Thy coming, and thy soft imbraces, hee Whose image thou art, him thou shall enjoy Inseparablie thine, to him shalt beare Multitudes like thy self, and thence be call'd Mother of human Race: what could I doe, But follow strait, invisibly thus led? Till I espi'd thee, fair indeed and tall, Under a Platan, yet methought less faire, Less winning soft, less amiablie milde, Then that smooth watry image; back I turnd, Thou following cryd'st aloud, Return fair EVE, Whom fli'st thou? whom thou fli'st, of him thou art, His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent Out of my side to thee, neerest my heart Substantial Life, to have thee by my side Henceforth an individual solace dear; Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim My other half: with that thy gentle hand Seisd mine, I yeilded, and from that time see How beauty is excelld by manly grace And wisdom, which alone is truly fair. So spake our general Mother, and with eyes Of conjugal attraction unreprov'd, And meek surrender, half imbracing leand On our first Father, half her swelling Breast Naked met his under the flowing Gold Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms Smil'd with superior Love, as JUPITER On JUNO smiles, when he impregns the Clouds That shed MAY Flowers; and press'd her Matron lip With kisses pure: aside the Devil turnd For envie, yet with jealous leer maligne Ey'd them askance, and to himself thus plaind. Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two Imparadis't in one anothers arms The happier EDEN, shall enjoy thir fill Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust, Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire, Among our other torments not the least, Still unfulfill'd with pain of longing pines; Yet let me not forget what I have gain'd From thir own mouths; all is not theirs it seems: One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge call'd, Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidd'n? Suspicious, reasonless. Why should thir Lord Envie them that? can it be sin to know, Can it be death? and do they onely stand By Ignorance, is that thir happie state, The proof of thir obedience and thir faith? O fair foundation laid whereon to build Thir ruine! Hence I will excite thir minds With more desire to know, and to reject Envious commands, invented with designe To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such, They taste and die: what likelier can ensue? But first with narrow search I must walk round This Garden, and no corner leave unspi'd; A chance but chance may lead where I may meet Some wandring Spirit of Heav'n, by Fountain side, Or in thick shade retir'd, from him to draw What further would be learnt. Live while ye may, Yet happie pair; enjoy, till I return, Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed. So saying, his proud step he scornful turn'd, But with sly circumspection, and began Through wood, through waste, o're hil, o're dale his roam. Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heav'n With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun Slowly descended, and with right aspect Against the eastern Gate of Paradise Leveld his eevning Rayes: it was a Rock Of Alablaster, pil'd up to the Clouds, Conspicuous farr, winding with one ascent Accessible from Earth, one entrance high; The rest was craggie cliff, that overhung Still as it rose, impossible to climbe. Betwixt these rockie Pillars GABRIEL sat Chief of th' Angelic Guards, awaiting night; About him exercis'd Heroic Games Th' unarmed Youth of Heav'n, but nigh at hand Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold. Thither came URIEL, gliding through the Eeven On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Starr In AUTUMN thwarts the night, when vapors fir'd Impress the Air, and shews the Mariner From what point of his Compass to beware Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste. GABRIEL, to thee thy cours by Lot hath giv'n Charge and strict watch that to this happie place No evil thing approach or enter in; This day at highth of Noon came to my Spheare A Spirit, zealous, as he seem'd, to know More of th' Almighties works, and chiefly Man Gods latest Image: I describ'd his way Bent all on speed, and markt his Aerie Gate; But in the Mount that lies from EDEN North, Where he first lighted, soon discernd his looks Alien from Heav'n, with passions foul obscur'd: Mine eye pursu'd him still, but under shade Lost sight of him; one of the banisht crew I fear, hath ventur'd from the deep, to raise New troubles; him thy care must be to find. To whom the winged Warriour thus returnd: URIEL, no wonder if thy perfet sight, Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sitst, See farr and wide: in at this Gate none pass The vigilance here plac't, but such as come Well known from Heav'n; and since Meridian hour No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort, So minded, have oreleapt these earthie bounds On purpose, hard thou knowst it to exclude Spiritual substance with corporeal barr. But if within the circuit of these walks In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom Thou telst, by morrow dawning I shall know. So promis'd hee, and URIEL to his charge Returnd on that bright beam, whose point now raisd Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fall'n Beneath th' AZORES; whither the prime Orb, Incredible how swift, had thither rowl'd Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth By shorter flight to th' East, had left him there Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend: Now came still Eevning on, and Twilight gray Had in her sober Liverie all things clad; Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird, They to thir grassie Couch, these to thir Nests Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale; She all night long her amorous descant sung; Silence was pleas'd: now glow'd the Firmament With living Saphirs: HESPERUS that led The starrie Host, rode brightest, till the Moon Rising in clouded Majestie, at length Apparent Queen unvaild her peerless light, And o're the dark her Silver Mantle threw. When ADAM thus to EVE: Fair Consort, th' hour Of night, and all things now retir'd to rest Mind us of like repose, since God hath set Labour and rest, as day and night to men Successive, and the timely dew of sleep Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long Rove idle unimploid, and less need rest; Man hath his daily work of body or mind Appointed, which declares his Dignitie, And the regard of Heav'n on all his waies; While other Animals unactive range, And of thir doings God takes no account. Tomorrow ere fresh Morning streak the East With first approach of light, we must be ris'n, And at our pleasant labour, to reform Yon flourie Arbors, yonder Allies green, Our walks at noon, with branches overgrown, That mock our scant manuring, and require More hands then ours to lop thir wanton growth: Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms, That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth, Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease; Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest. To whom thus EVE with perfet beauty adornd. My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst Unargu'd I obey; so God ordains, God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more Is womans happiest knowledge and her praise. With thee conversing I forget all time, All seasons and thir change, all please alike. Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet, With charm of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun When first on this delightful Land he spreads His orient Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour, Glistring with dew; fragrant the fertil earth After soft showers; and sweet the coming on Of grateful Eevning milde, then silent Night With this her solemn Bird and this fair Moon, And these the Gemms of Heav'n, her starrie train: But neither breath of Morn when she ascends With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, floure, Glistring with dew, nor fragrance after showers, Nor grateful Evening mild, nor silent Night With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon, Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet. But wherfore all night long shine these, for whom This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes? To whom our general Ancestor repli'd. Daughter of God and Man, accomplisht EVE, Those have thir course to finish, round the Earth, By morrow Eevning, and from Land to Land In order, though to Nations yet unborn, Ministring light prepar'd, they set and rise; Least total darkness should by Night regaine Her old possession, and extinguish life In Nature and all things, which these soft fires Not only enlighten, but with kindly heate Of various influence foment and warme, Temper or nourish, or in part shed down Thir stellar vertue on all kinds that grow On Earth, made hereby apter to receive Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray. These then, though unbeheld in deep of night, Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none, That heav'n would want spectators, God want praise; Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep: All these with ceasless praise his works behold Both day and night: how often from the steep Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard Celestial voices to the midnight air, Sole, or responsive each to others note Singing thir great Creator: oft in bands While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk With Heav'nly touch of instrumental sounds In full harmonic number joind, thir songs Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven. Thus talking hand in hand alone they pass'd On to thir blissful Bower; it was a place Chos'n by the sovran Planter, when he fram'd All things to mans delightful use; the roofe Of thickest covert was inwoven shade Laurel and Mirtle, and what higher grew Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side ACANTHUS, and each odorous bushie shrub Fenc'd up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour, IRIS all hues, Roses, and Gessamin Rear'd high thir flourisht heads between, and wrought Mosaic; underfoot the Violet, Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay Broiderd the ground, more colour'd then with stone Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm durst enter none; Such was thir awe of man. In shadier Bower More sacred and sequesterd, though but feignd, PAN or SILVANUS never slept, nor Nymph, Nor FAUNUS haunted. Here in close recess With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs Espoused EVE deckt first her Nuptial Bed, And heav'nly Quires the Hymenaean sung, What day the genial Angel to our Sire Brought her in naked beauty more adorn'd, More lovely then PANDORA, whom the Gods Endowd with all thir gifts, and O too like In sad event, when to the unwiser Son Mankind with her faire looks, to be aveng'd On him who had stole JOVES authentic fire. Thus at thir shadie Lodge arriv'd, both stood, Both turnd, and under op'n Skie ador'd The God that made both Skie, Air, Earth & Heav'n Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe And starrie Pole: Thou also mad'st the Night, Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day, Which we in our appointed work imployd Have finisht happie in our mutual help And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss Ordain'd by thee, and this delicious place For us too large, where thy abundance wants Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground. But thou hast promis'd from us two a Race To fill the Earth, who shall with us extoll Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake, And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep. This said unanimous, and other Rites Observing none, but adoration pure Which God likes best, into thir inmost bower Handed they went; and eas'd the putting off These troublesom disguises which wee wear, Strait side by side were laid, nor turnd I weene ADAM from his fair Spouse, nor EVE the Rites Mysterious of connubial Love refus'd: Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk Of puritie and place and innocence, Defaming as impure what God declares Pure, and commands to som, leaves free to all. Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain Haile wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source Of human ofspring, sole proprietie, In Paradise of all things common else. By thee adulterous lust was driv'n from men Among the bestial herds to raunge, by thee Relations dear, and all the Charities Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known. Farr be it, that I should write thee sin or blame, Or think thee unbefitting holiest place, Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets, Whose Bed is undefil'd and chast pronounc't, Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs us'd. Here Love his golden shafts imploies, here lights His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings, Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unindeard, Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours Mixt Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal, Or Serenate, which the starv'd Lover sings To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain. These lulld by Nightingales imbraceing slept, And on thir naked limbs the flourie roof Showrd Roses, which the Morn repair'd. Sleep on, Blest pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek No happier state, and know to know no more. Now had night measur'd with her shaddowie Cone Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault, And from thir Ivorie Port the Cherubim Forth issuing at th' accustomd hour stood armd To thir night watches in warlike Parade, When GABRIEL to his next in power thus spake. UZZIEL, half these draw off, and coast the South With strictest watch; these other wheel the North, Our circuit meets full West. As flame they part Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear. From these, two strong and suttle Spirits he calld That neer him stood, and gave them thus in charge. ITHURIEL and ZEPHON, with wingd speed Search through this Garden, leav unsearcht no nook, But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge, Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harme. This Eevning from the Sun's decline arriv'd Who tells of som infernal Spirit seen Hitherward bent who could have thought? escap'd The barrs of Hell, on errand bad no doubt: Such where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring. So saying, on he led his radiant Files, Daz'ling the Moon; these to the Bower direct In search of whom they sought: him there they found Squat like a Toad, close at the eare of EVE; Assaying by his Devilish art to reach The Organs of her Fancie, and with them forge Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams, Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint Th' animal Spirits that from pure blood arise Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise At least distemperd, discontented thoughts, Vain hopes, vain aimes, inordinate desires Blown up with high conceits ingendring pride. Him thus intent ITHURIEL with his Spear Touch'd lightly; for no falshood can endure Touch of Celestial temper, but returns Of force to its own likeness: up he starts Discoverd and surpriz'd. As when a spark Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid Fit for the Tun som Magazin to store Against a rumord Warr, the Smuttie graine With sudden blaze diffus'd, inflames the Aire: So started up in his own shape the Fiend. Back stept those two fair Angels half amaz'd So sudden to behold the grieslie King; Yet thus, unmovd with fear, accost him soon. Which of those rebell Spirits adjudg'd to Hell Com'st thou, escap'd thy prison, and transform'd, Why satst thou like an enemie in waite Here watching at the head of these that sleep? Know ye not then said SATAN, filld with scorn, Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate For you, there sitting where ye durst not soare; Not to know mee argues your selves unknown, The lowest of your throng; or if ye know, Why ask ye, and superfluous begin Your message, like to end as much in vain? To whom thus ZEPHON, answering scorn with scorn. Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same, Or undiminisht brightness, to be known As when thou stoodst in Heav'n upright and pure; That Glorie then, when thou no more wast good, Departed from thee, and thou resembl'st now Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foule. But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep This place inviolable, and these from harm. So spake the Cherube, and his grave rebuke Severe in youthful beautie, added grace Invincible: abasht the Devil stood, And felt how awful goodness is, and saw Vertue in her shape how lovly, saw, and pin'd His loss; but chiefly to find here observd His lustre visibly impar'd; yet seemd Undaunted. If I must contend, said he, Best with the best, the Sender not the sent, Or all at once; more glorie will be wonn, Or less be lost. Thy fear, said ZEPHON bold, Will save us trial what the least can doe Single against thee wicked, and thence weak. The Fiend repli'd not, overcome with rage; But like a proud Steed reind, went hautie on, Chaumping his iron curb: to strive or flie He held it vain; awe from above had quelld His heart, not else dismai'd. Now drew they nigh The western point, where those half-rounding guards Just met, & closing stood in squadron joind Awaiting next command. To whom thir Chief GABRIEL from the Front thus calld aloud. O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet Hasting this way, and now by glimps discerne ITHURIEL and ZEPHON through the shade, And with them comes a third of Regal port, But faded splendor wan; who by his gate And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell, Not likely to part hence without contest; Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours. He scarce had ended, when those two approachd And brief related whom they brought, wher found, How busied, in what form and posture coucht. To whom with stern regard thus GABRIEL spake. Why hast thou, SATAN, broke the bounds prescrib'd To thy transgressions, and disturbd the charge Of others, who approve not to transgress By thy example, but have power and right To question thy bold entrance on this place; Imploi'd it seems to violate sleep, and those Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss? To whom thus SATAN with contemptuous brow. GABRIEL, thou hadst in Heav'n th' esteem of wise, And such I held thee; but this question askt Puts me in doubt. Lives ther who loves his pain? Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell, Though thither doomd? Thou wouldst thy self, no doubt, And boldly venture to whatever place Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change Torment with ease, & soonest recompence Dole with delight, which in this place I sought; To thee no reason; who knowst only good, But evil hast not tri'd: and wilt object His will who bound us? let him surer barr His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay In that dark durance: thus much what was askt. The rest is true, they found me where they say; But that implies not violence or harme. Thus hee in scorn. The warlike Angel mov'd, Disdainfully half smiling thus repli'd. O loss of one in Heav'n to judge of wise, Since SATAN fell, whom follie overthrew, And now returns him from his prison scap't, Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither Unlicenc't from his bounds in Hell prescrib'd; So wise he judges it to fly from pain However, and to scape his punishment. So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrauth, Which thou incurr'st by flying, meet thy flight Seavenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell, Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain Can equal anger infinite provok't. But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they Less hardie to endure? courageous Chief, The first in flight from pain, had'st thou alleg'd To thy deserted host this cause of flight, Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive. To which the Fiend thus answerd frowning stern. Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain, Insulting Angel, well thou knowst I stood Thy fiercest, when in Battel to thy aide The blasting volied Thunder made all speed And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear. But still thy words at random, as before, Argue thy inexperience what behooves From hard assaies and ill successes past A faithful Leader, not to hazard all Through wayes of danger by himself untri'd. I therefore, I alone first undertook To wing the desolate Abyss, and spie This new created World, whereof in Hell Fame is not silent, here in hope to find Better abode, and my afflicted Powers To settle here on Earth, or in mid Aire; Though for possession put to try once more What thou and thy gay Legions dare against; Whose easier business were to serve thir Lord High up in Heav'n, with songs to hymne his Throne, And practis'd distances to cringe, not fight. To whom the warriour Angel soon repli'd. To say and strait unsay, pretending first Wise to flie pain, professing next the Spie, Argues no Leader, but a lyar trac't, SATAN, and couldst thou faithful add? O name, O sacred name of faithfulness profan'd! Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew? Armie of Fiends, fit body to fit head; Was this your discipline and faith ingag'd, Your military obedience, to dissolve Allegeance to th' acknowledg'd Power supream? And thou sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem Patron of liberty, who more then thou Once fawn'd, and cring'd, and servilly ador'd Heav'ns awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope To dispossess him, and thy self to reigne? But mark what I arreede thee now, avant; Flie thither whence thou fledst: if from this houre Within these hallowd limits thou appeer, Back to th' infernal pit I drag thee chaind, And Seale thee so, as henceforth not to scorne The facil gates of hell too slightly barrd. So threatn'd hee, but SATAN to no threats Gave heed, but waxing more in rage repli'd. Then when I am thy captive talk of chaines, Proud limitarie Cherube, but ere then Farr heavier load thy self expect to feel From my prevailing arme, though Heavens King Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers, Us'd to the yoak, draw'st his triumphant wheels In progress through the rode of Heav'n Star-pav'd. While thus he spake, th' Angelic Squadron bright Turnd fierie red, sharpning in mooned hornes Thir Phalanx, and began to hemm him round With ported Spears, as thick as when a field Of CERES ripe for harvest waving bends Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind Swayes them; the careful Plowman doubting stands Least on the threshing floore his hopeful sheaves Prove chaff. On th' other side SATAN allarm'd Collecting all his might dilated stood, Like TENERIFF or ATLAS unremov'd: His stature reacht the Skie, and on his Crest Sat horror Plum'd; nor wanted in his graspe What seemd both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds Might have ensu'd, nor onely Paradise In this commotion, but the Starrie Cope Of Heav'n perhaps, or all the Elements At least had gon to rack, disturbd and torne With violence of this conflict, had not soon Th' Eternal to prevent such horrid fray Hung forth in Heav'n his golden Scales, yet seen Betwixt ASTREA and the SCORPION signe, Wherein all things created first he weighd, The pendulous round Earth with ballanc't Aire In counterpoise, now ponders all events, Battels and Realms: in these he put two weights The sequel each of parting and of fight; The latter quick up flew, and kickt the beam; Which GABRIEL spying, thus bespake the Fiend. SATAN, I know thy strength, and thou knowst mine, Neither our own but giv'n; what follie then To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more Then Heav'n permits, nor mine, though doubld now To trample thee as mire: for proof look up, And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign Where thou art weigh'd, & shown how light, how weak, If thou resist. The Fiend lookt up and knew His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night. Now Morn her rosie steps in th' Eastern Clime Advancing, sow'd the Earth with Orient Pearle, When ADAM wak't, so customd, for his sleep Was Aerie light, from pure digestion bred, And temperat vapors bland, which th' only sound Of leaves and fuming rills, AURORA's fan, Lightly dispers'd, and the shrill Matin Song Of Birds on every bough; so much the more His wonder was to find unwak'nd EVE With Tresses discompos'd, and glowing Cheek, As through unquiet rest: he on his side Leaning half-rais'd, with looks of cordial Love Hung over her enamour'd, and beheld Beautie, which whether waking or asleep, Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice Milde, as when ZEPHYRUS on FLORA breathes, Her hand soft touching, whisperd thus. Awake My fairest, my espous'd, my latest found, Heav'ns last best gift, my ever new delight, Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove, What drops the Myrrhe, & what the balmie Reed, How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid sweet. Such whispering wak'd her, but with startl'd eye On ADAM, whom imbracing, thus she spake. O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose, My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I see Thy face, and Morn return'd, for I this Night, Such night till this I never pass'd, have dream'd, If dream'd, not as I oft am wont, of thee, Works of day pass't, or morrows next designe, But of offence and trouble, which my mind Knew never till this irksom night; methought Close at mine ear one call'd me forth to walk With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said, Why sleepst thou EVE? now is the pleasant time, The cool, the silent, save where silence yields To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake Tunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reignes Full Orb'd the Moon, and with more pleasing light Shadowie sets off the face of things; in vain, If none regard; Heav'n wakes with all his eyes, Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire, In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze. I rose as at thy call, but found thee not; To find thee I directed then my walk; And on, methought, alone I pass'd through ways That brought me on a sudden to the Tree Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seem'd, Much fairer to my Fancie then by day: And as I wondring lookt, beside it stood One shap'd & wing'd like one of those from Heav'n By us oft seen; his dewie locks distill'd Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gaz'd; And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharg'd, Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet, Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despis'd? Or envie, or what reserve forbids to taste? Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold Longer thy offerd good, why else set here? This said he paus'd not, but with ventrous Arme He pluckt, he tasted; mee damp horror chil'd At such bold words voucht with a deed so bold: But he thus overjoy'd, O Fruit Divine, Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropt, Forbidd'n here, it seems, as onely fit For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men: And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more Communicated, more abundant growes, The Author not impair'd, but honourd more? Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic EVE, Partake thou also; happie though thou art, Happier thou mayst be, worthier canst not be: Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind, But somtimes in the Air, as wee, somtimes Ascend to Heav'n, by merit thine, and see What life the Gods live there, and such live thou. So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held, Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part Which he had pluckt; the pleasant savourie smell So quick'nd appetite, that I, methought, Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds With him I flew, and underneath beheld The Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wide And various: wondring at my flight and change To this high exaltation; suddenly My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down, And fell asleep; but O how glad I wak'd To find this but a dream! Thus EVE her Night Related, and thus ADAM answerd sad. Best Image of my self and dearer half, The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep Affects me equally; nor can I like This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear; Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none, Created pure. But know that in the Soule Are many lesser Faculties that serve Reason as chief; among these Fansie next Her office holds; of all external things, Which the five watchful Senses represent, She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes, Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, frames All what we affirm or what deny, and call Our knowledge or opinion; then retires Into her private Cell when Nature rests. Oft in her absence mimic Fansie wakes To imitate her; but misjoyning shapes, Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams, Ill matching words and deeds long past or late. Som such resemblances methinks I find Of our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream, But with addition strange; yet be not sad. Evil into the mind of God or Man May come and go, so unapprov'd, and leave No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope That what in sleep thou didst abhorr to dream, Waking thou never wilt consent to do. Be not disheart'nd then, nor cloud those looks That wont to be more chearful and serene Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World, And let us to our fresh imployments rise That open now thir choicest bosom'd smells Reservd from night, and kept for thee in store. So cheard he his fair Spouse, and she was cheard, But silently a gentle tear let fall From either eye, and wip'd them with her haire; Two other precious drops that ready stood, Each in thir chrystal sluce, hee ere they fell Kiss'd as the gracious signs of sweet remorse And pious awe, that feard to have offended. So all was cleard, and to the Field they haste. But first from under shadie arborous roof, Soon as they forth were come to open sight Of day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen With wheels yet hov'ring o're the Ocean brim, Shot paralel to the earth his dewie ray, Discovering in wide Lantskip all the East Of Paradise and EDENS happie Plains, Lowly they bow'd adoring, and began Thir Orisons, each Morning duly paid In various style, for neither various style Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise Thir Maker, in fit strains pronounc't or sung Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence Flowd from thir lips, in Prose or numerous Verse, More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp To add more sweetness, and they thus began. These are thy glorious works, Parent of good, Almightie, thine this universal Frame, Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then! Unspeakable, who sitst above these Heavens To us invisible or dimly seen In these thy lowest works, yet these declare Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine: Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light, Angels, for yee behold him, and with songs And choral symphonies, Day without Night, Circle his Throne rejoycing, yee in Heav'n, On Earth joyn all yee Creatures to extoll Him first, him last, him midst, and without end. Fairest of Starrs, last in the train of Night, If better thou belong not to the dawn, Sure pledge of day, that crownst the smiling Morn With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Spheare While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime. Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soule, Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise In thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st, And when high Noon hast gaind, & when thou fallst. Moon, that now meetst the orient Sun, now fli'st With the fixt Starrs, fixt in thir Orb that flies, And yee five other wandring Fires that move In mystic Dance not without Song, resound His praise, who out of Darkness call'd up Light. Aire, and ye Elements the eldest birth Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix And nourish all things, let your ceasless change Varie to our great Maker still new praise. Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise From Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or grey, Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold, In honour to the Worlds great Author rise, Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd skie, Or wet the thirstie Earth with falling showers, Rising or falling still advance his praise. His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow, Breath soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines, With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave. Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow, Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise. Joyn voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds, That singing up to Heaven Gate ascend, Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise; Yee that in Waters glide, and yee that walk The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep; Witness if I be silent, Morn or Eeven, To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise. Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still To give us onely good; and if the night Have gathered aught of evil or conceald, Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark. So pray'd they innocent, and to thir thoughts Firm peace recoverd soon and wonted calm. On to thir mornings rural work they haste Among sweet dewes and flours; where any row Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reachd too farr Thir pamperd boughes, and needed hands to check Fruitless imbraces: or they led the Vine To wed her Elm; she spous'd about him twines Her mariageable arms, and with her brings Her dowr th' adopted Clusters, to adorn His barren leaves. Them thus imploid beheld With pittie Heav'ns high King, and to him call'd RAPHAEL, the sociable Spirit, that deign'd To travel with TOBIAS, and secur'd His marriage with the seaventimes-wedded Maid. RAPHAEL, said hee, thou hear'st what stir on Earth SATAN from Hell scap't through the darksom Gulf Hath raisd in Paradise, and how disturbd This night the human pair, how he designes In them at once to ruin all mankind. Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend Converse with ADAM, in what Bowre or shade Thou find'st him from the heat of Noon retir'd, To respit his day-labour with repast, Or with repose; and such discourse bring on, As may advise him of his happie state, Happiness in his power left free to will, Left to his own free Will, his Will though free, Yet mutable; whence warne him to beware He swerve not too secure: tell him withall His danger, and from whom, what enemie Late falln himself from Heav'n, is plotting now The fall of others from like state of bliss; By violence, no, for that shall be withstood, But by deceit and lies; this let him know, Least wilfully transgressing he pretend Surprisal, unadmonisht, unforewarnd. So spake th' Eternal Father, and fulfilld All Justice: nor delaid the winged Saint After his charge receivd, but from among Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood Vaild with his gorgeous wings, up springing light Flew through the midst of Heav'n; th' angelic Quires On each hand parting, to his speed gave way Through all th' Empyreal road; till at the Gate Of Heav'n arriv'd, the gate self-opend wide On golden Hinges turning, as by work Divine the sov'ran Architect had fram'd. From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight, Starr interpos'd, however small he sees, Not unconform to other shining Globes, Earth and the Gard'n of God, with Cedars crownd Above all Hills. As when by night the Glass Of GALILEO, less assur'd, observes Or Pilot from amidst the CYCLADES DELOS or SAMOS first appeering kenns A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Skie Sailes between worlds & worlds, with steddie wing Now on the polar windes, then with quick Fann Winnows the buxom Air; till within soare Of Towring Eagles, to all the Fowles he seems A PHOENIX, gaz'd by all, as that sole Bird When to enshrine his reliques in the Sun's At once on th' Eastern cliff of Paradise He lights, and to his proper shape returns A Seraph wingd; six wings he wore, to shade His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad Each shoulder broad, came mantling o're his brest With regal Ornament; the middle pair Girt like a Starrie Zone his waste, and round Skirted his loines and thighes with downie Gold And colours dipt in Heav'n; the third his feet Shaddowd from either heele with featherd maile Skie-tinctur'd grain. Like MAIA'S son he stood, And shook his Plumes, that Heav'nly fragrance filld The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the bands Of Angels under watch; and to his state, And to his message high in honour rise; For on som message high they guessd him bound. Thir glittering Tents he passd, and now is come Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrhe, And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balme; A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here Wantond as in her prime, and plaid at will Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet, Wilde above rule or art; enormous bliss. Him through the spicie Forrest onward com ADAM discernd, as in the dore he sat Of his coole Bowre, while now the mounted Sun Shot down direct his fervid Raies, to warme Earths inmost womb, more warmth then ADAM need; And EVE within, due at her hour prepar'd For dinner savourie fruits, of taste to please True appetite, and not disrelish thirst Of nectarous draughts between, from milkie stream, Berrie or Grape: to whom thus ADAM call'd. Haste hither EVE, and worth thy sight behold Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape Comes this way moving; seems another Morn Ris'n on mid-noon; som great behest from Heav'n To us perhaps he brings, and will voutsafe This day to be our Guest. But goe with speed, And what thy stores contain, bring forth and poure Abundance, fit to honour and receive Our Heav'nly stranger; well we may afford Our givers thir own gifts, and large bestow From large bestowd, where Nature multiplies Her fertil growth, and by disburd'ning grows More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare. To whom thus EVE. ADAM, earths hallowd mould, Of God inspir'd, small store will serve, where store, All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk; Save what by frugal storing firmness gains To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes: But I will haste and from each bough and break, Each Plant & juciest Gourd will pluck such choice To entertain our Angel guest, as hee Beholding shall confess that here on Earth God hath dispenst his bounties as in Heav'n. So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent What choice to chuse for delicacie best, What order, so contriv'd as not to mix Tastes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bring Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change, Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yeilds In INDIA East or West, or middle shoare In PONTUS or the PUNIC Coast, or where ALCINOUS reign'd, fruit of all kindes, in coate, Rough, or smooth rin'd, or bearded husk, or shell She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meathes From many a berrie, and from sweet kernels prest She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum'd. Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train Accompani'd then with his own compleat Perfections, in himself was all his state, More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits On Princes, when thir rich Retinue long Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeard with Gold Dazles the croud, and sets them all agape. Neerer his presence ADAM though not awd, Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek, As to a superior Nature, bowing low, Thus said. Native of Heav'n, for other place None can then Heav'n such glorious shape contain; Since by descending from the Thrones above, Those happie places thou hast deignd a while To want, and honour these, voutsafe with us Two onely, who yet by sov'ran gift possess This spacious ground, in yonder shadie Bowre To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears To sit and taste, till this meridian heat Be over, and the Sun more coole decline. Whom thus the Angelic Vertue answerd milde. ADAM, I therefore came, nor art thou such Created, or such place hast here to dwell, As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heav'n To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bowre Oreshades; for these mid-hours, till Eevning rise I have at will. So to the Silvan Lodge They came, that like POMONA'S Arbour smil'd With flourets deck't and fragrant smells; but EVE Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feign'd Of three that in Mount IDA naked strove, Stood to entertain her guest from Heav'n; no vaile Shee needed, Vertue-proof, no thought infirme Alterd her cheek. On whom the Angel HAILE Bestowd, the holy salutation us'd Long after to blest MARIE, second EVE. Haile Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons Then with these various fruits the Trees of God Have heap'd this Table. Rais'd of grassie terf Thir Table was, and mossie seats had round, And on her ample Square from side to side All AUTUMN pil'd, though SPRING and AUTUMN here Danc'd hand in hand. A while discourse they hold; No fear lest Dinner coole; when thus began Our Authour. Heav'nly stranger, please to taste These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom All perfet good unmeasur'd out, descends, To us for food and for delight hath caus'd The Earth to yeild; unsavourie food perhaps To spiritual Natures; only this I know, That one Celestial Father gives to all. To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives Whose praise be ever sung to man in part Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found No ingrateful food: and food alike those pure Intelligential substances require As doth your Rational; and both contain Within them every lower facultie Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste, Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate, And corporeal to incorporeal turn. For know, whatever was created, needs To be sustaind and fed; of Elements The grosser feeds the purer, earth the sea, Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon; Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurg'd Vapours not yet into her substance turnd. Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale From her moist Continent to higher Orbes. The Sun that light imparts to all, receives From all his alimental recompence In humid exhalations, and at Even Sups with the Ocean: though in Heav'n the Trees Of life ambrosial frutage bear, and vines Yeild Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn We brush mellifluous Dewes, and find the ground Cover'd with pearly grain: yet God hath here Varied his bounty so with new delights, As may compare with Heaven; and to taste Think not I shall be nice. So down they sat, And to thir viands fell, nor seemingly The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch Of real hunger, and concoctive heate To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire Of sooty coal the Empiric Alchimist Can turn, or holds it possible to turn Metals of drossiest Ore to perfet Gold As from the Mine. Mean while at Table EVE Ministerd naked, and thir flowing cups With pleasant liquors crown'd: O innocence Deserving Paradise! if ever, then, Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin Enamour'd at that sight; but in those hearts Love unlibidinous reign'd, nor jealousie Was understood, the injur'd Lovers Hell. Thus when with meats & drinks they had suffic'd, Not burd'nd Nature, sudden mind arose In ADAM, not to let th' occasion pass Given him by this great Conference to know Of things above his World, and of thir being Who dwell in Heav'n, whose excellence he saw Transcend his own so farr, whose radiant forms Divine effulgence, whose high Power so far Exceeded human, and his wary speech Thus to th' Empyreal Minister he fram'd. Inhabitant with God, now know I well Thy favour, in this honour done to man, Under whose lowly roof thou hast voutsaf't To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste, Food not of Angels, yet accepted so, As that more willingly thou couldst not seem At Heav'ns high feasts to have fed: yet what compare? To whom the winged Hierarch repli'd. O ADAM, one Almightie is, from whom All things proceed, and up to him return, If not deprav'd from good, created all Such to perfection, one first matter all, Indu'd with various forms, various degrees Of substance, and in things that live, of life; But more refin'd, more spiritous, and pure, As neerer to him plac't or neerer tending Each in thir several active Sphears assignd, Till body up to spirit work, in bounds Proportiond to each kind. So from the root Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves More aerie, last the bright consummate floure Spirits odorous breathes: flours and thir fruit Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublim'd To vital Spirits aspire, to animal, To intellectual, give both life and sense, Fansie and understanding, whence the soule Reason receives, and reason is her being, Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours, Differing but in degree, of kind the same. Wonder not then, what God for you saw good If I refuse not, but convert, as you, To proper substance; time may come when men With Angels may participate, and find No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare: And from these corporal nutriments perhaps Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit Improv'd by tract of time, and wingd ascend Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice Here or in Heav'nly Paradises dwell; If ye be found obedient, and retain Unalterably firm his love entire Whose progenie you are. Mean while enjoy Your fill what happiness this happie state Can comprehend, incapable of more. To whom the Patriarch of mankind repli'd. O favourable spirit, propitious guest, Well hast thou taught the way that might direct Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set From center to circumference, whereon In contemplation of created things By steps we may ascend to God. But say, What meant that caution joind, IF YE BE FOUND OBEDIENT? can wee want obedience then To him, or possibly his love desert Who formd us from the dust, and plac'd us here Full to the utmost measure of what bliss Human desires can seek or apprehend? To whom the Angel. Son of Heav'n and Earth, Attend: That thou art happie, owe to God; That thou continu'st such, owe to thy self, That is, to thy obedience; therein stand. This was that caution giv'n thee; be advis'd. God made thee perfet, not immutable; And good he made thee, but to persevere He left it in thy power, ordaind thy will By nature free, not over-rul'd by Fate Inextricable, or strict necessity; Our voluntarie service he requires, Not our necessitated, such with him Findes no acceptance, nor can find, for how Can hearts, not free, be tri'd whether they serve Willing or no, who will but what they must By Destinie, and can no other choose? My self and all th' Angelic Host that stand In sight of God enthron'd, our happie state Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds; On other surety none; freely we serve. Because wee freely love, as in our will To love or not; in this we stand or fall: And som are fall'n, to disobedience fall'n, And so from Heav'n to deepest Hell; O fall From what high state of bliss into what woe! To whom our great Progenitor. Thy words Attentive, and with more delighted eare Divine instructer, I have heard, then when Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills Aereal Music send: nor knew I not To be both will and deed created free; Yet that we never shall forget to love Our maker, and obey him whose command Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts Assur'd me and still assure: though what thou tellst Hath past in Heav'n, som doubt within me move, But more desire to hear, if thou consent, The full relation, which must needs be strange, Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard; And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun Hath finisht half his journey, and scarce begins His other half in the great Zone of Heav'n. Thus ADAM made request, and RAPHAEL After short pause assenting, thus began. High matter thou injoinst me, O prime of men, Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate To human sense th' invisible exploits Of warring Spirits; how without remorse The ruin of so many glorious once And perfet while they stood; how last unfould The secrets of another world, perhaps Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good This is dispenc't, and what surmounts the reach Of human sense, I shall delineate so, By lik'ning spiritual to corporal forms, As may express them best, though what if Earth Be but the shaddow of Heav'n, and things therein Each to other like, more then on earth is thought? As yet this world was not, and CHAOS wilde Reignd where these Heav'ns now rowl, where Earth now rests Upon her Center pois'd, when on a day For Time, though in Eternitie, appli'd To motion, measures all things durable By present, past, and future on such day As Heav'ns great Year brings forth, th' Empyreal Host Of Angels by Imperial summons call'd, Innumerable before th' Almighties Throne Forthwith from all the ends of Heav'n appeerd Under thir Hierarchs in orders bright Ten thousand thousand Ensignes high advanc'd, Standards, and Gonfalons twixt Van and Reare Streame in the Aire, and for distinction serve Or in thir glittering Tissues bear imblaz'd Holy Memorials, acts of Zeale and Love Recorded eminent. Thus when in Orbes Of circuit inexpressible they stood, Orb within Orb, the Father infinite, By whom in bliss imbosom'd sat the Son, Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whoseop Brightness had made invisible, thus spake. Hear my Decree, which unrevok't shall stand. This day I have begot whom I declare My onely Son, and on this holy Hill Him have anointed, whom ye now behold At my right hand; your Head I him appoint; And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow All knees in Heav'n, and shall confess him Lord: Under his great Vice-gerent Reign abide United as one individual Soule For ever happie: him who disobeyes Mee disobeyes, breaks union, and that day Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls Into utter darkness, deep ingulft, his place Ordaind without redemption, without end. So spake th' Omnipotent, and with his words All seemd well pleas'd, all seem'd, but were not all. That day, as other solem dayes, they spent In song and dance about the sacred Hill, Mystical dance, which yonder starrie Spheare Of Planets and of fixt in all her Wheeles Resembles nearest, mazes intricate, Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular Then most, when most irregular they seem: And in thir motions harmonie Divine So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear Listens delighted. Eevning approachd For we have also our Eevning and our Morn, We ours for change delectable, not need Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn Desirous, all in Circles as they stood, Tables are set, and on a sudden pil'd With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows: In Pearl, in Diamond, and massie Gold, Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heav'n. They eat, they drink, and with refection sweet Are fill'd, before th' all bounteous King, who showrd With copious hand, rejoycing in thir joy. Now when ambrosial Night with Clouds exhal'd From that high mount of God, whence light & shade Spring both, the face of brightest Heav'n had changd To grateful Twilight for Night comes not there In darker veile and roseat Dews dispos'd All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest, Wide over all the Plain, and wider farr Then all this globous Earth in Plain outspred, Such are the Courts of God Th' Angelic throng Disperst in Bands and Files thir Camp extend By living Streams among the Trees of Life, Pavilions numberless, and sudden reard, Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept Fannd with coole Winds, save those who in thir course Melodious Hymns about the sovran Throne Alternate all night long: but not so wak'd SATAN, so call him now, his former name Is heard no more Heav'n; he of the first, If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power, In favour and praeeminence, yet fraught With envie against the Son of God, that day Honourd by his great Father, and proclaimd MESSIAH King anointed, could not beare Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaird. Deep malice thence conceiving & disdain, Soon as midnight brought on the duskie houre Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolv'd With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave Unworshipt, unobey'd the Throne supream Contemptuous, and his next subordinate Awak'ning, thus to him in secret spake. Sleepst thou Companion dear, what sleep can close Thy eye-lids? and remembrest what Decree Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips Of Heav'ns Almightie. Thou to me thy thoughts Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart; Both waking we were one; how then can now Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou seest impos'd; New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate What doubtful may ensue, more in this place To utter is not safe. Assemble thou Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief; Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night Her shadowie Cloud withdraws, I am to haste, And all who under me thir Banners wave, Homeward with flying march where we possess The Quarters of the North, there to prepare Fit entertainment to receive our King The great MESSIAH, and his new commands, Who speedily through all the Hierarchies Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws. So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infus'd Bad influence into th' unwarie brest Of his Associate; hee together calls, Or several one by one, the Regent Powers, Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught, That the most High commanding, now ere Night, Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heav'n, The great Hierarchal Standard was to move; Tells the suggested cause, and casts between Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound Or taint integritie; but all obey'd The wonted signal, and superior voice Of thir great Potentate; for great indeed His name, and high was his degree in Heav'n; His count'nance, as the Morning Starr that guides The starrie flock, allur'd them, and with lyes Drew after him the third part of Heav'ns Host: Mean while th' Eternal eye, whose sight discernes Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy Mount And from within the golden Lamps that burne Nightly before him, saw without thir light Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spred Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes Were banded to oppose his high Decree; And smiling to his onely Son thus said. Son, thou in whom my glory I behold In full resplendence, Heir of all my might, Neerly it now concernes us to be sure Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms We mean to hold what anciently we claim Of Deitie or Empire, such a foe Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North; Nor so content, hath in his thought to trie In battel, what our Power is, or our right. Let us advise, and to this hazard draw With speed what force is left, and all imploy In our defence, lest unawares we lose This our high place, our Sanctuarie, our Hill. To whom the Son with calm aspect and cleer Light'ning Divine, ineffable, serene, Made answer. Mightie Father, thou thy foes Justly hast in derision, and secure Laugh'st at thir vain designes and tumults vain, Matter to mee of Glory, whom thir hate Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power Giv'n me to quell thir pride, and in event Know whether I be dextrous to subdue Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heav'n. So spake the Son, but SATAN with his Powers Farr was advanc't on winged speed, an Host Or Starrs of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun Impearls on every leaf and every flouer. Regions they pass'd, the mightie Regencies In thir triple Degrees, Regions to which All thy Dominion, ADAM, is no more Then what this Garden is to all the Earth, And all the Sea, from one entire globose Stretcht into Longitude; which having pass'd At length into the limits of the North They came, and SATAN to his Royal seat High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount Rais'd on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towrs From Diamond Quarries hew'n, & Rocks of Gold, The Palace of great LUCIFER, so call Interpreted which not long after, hee Affecting all equality with God, In imitation of that Mount whereon MESSIAH was declar'd in sight of Heav'n, The Mountain of the Congregation call'd; For thither he assembl'd all his Train, Pretending so commanded to consult About the great reception of thir King, Thither to come, and with calumnious Art Of counterfeted truth thus held thir ears. If these magnific Titles yet remain Not meerly titular, since by Decree Another now hath to himself ingross't All Power, and us eclipst under the name Of King anointed, for whom all this haste Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here, This onely to consult how we may best With what may be devis'd of honours new Receive him coming to receive from us Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile, Too much to one, but double how endur'd, To one and to his image now proclaim'd? But what if better counsels might erect Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke? Will ye submit your necks, and chuse to bend The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust To know ye right, or if ye know your selves Natives and Sons of Heav'n possest before By none, and if not equal all, yet free, Equally free; for Orders and Degrees Jarr not with liberty, but well consist. Who can in reason then or right assume Monarchie over such as live by right His equals, if in power and splendor less, In freedome equal? or can introduce Law and Edict on us, who without law Erre not, much less for this to be our Lord, And look for adoration to th' abuse Of those Imperial Titles which assert Our being ordain'd to govern, not to serve? Thus farr his bold discourse without controule Had audience, when among the Seraphim ABDIEL, then whom none with more zeale ador'd The Deitie, and divine commands obei'd, Stood up, and in a flame of zeale severe The current of his fury thus oppos'd. O argument blasphemous, false and proud! Words which no eare ever to hear in Heav'n Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate In place thy self so high above thy Peeres. Canst thou with impious obloquie condemne The just Decree of God, pronounc't and sworn, That to his only Son by right endu'd With Regal Scepter, every Soule in Heav'n Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due Confess him rightful King? unjust thou saist Flatly unjust, to binde with Laws the free, And equal over equals to let Reigne, One over all with unsucceeded power. Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute With him the points of libertie, who made Thee what thou art, & formd the Pow'rs of Heav'n Such as he pleasd, and circumscrib'd thir being? Yet by experience taught we know how good, And of our good, and of our dignitie How provident he is, how farr from thought To make us less, bent rather to exalt Our happie state under one Head more neer United. But to grant it thee unjust, That equal over equals Monarch Reigne: Thy self though great & glorious dost thou count, Or all Angelic Nature joind in one, Equal to him begotten Son, by whom As by his Word the mighty Father made All things, ev'n thee, and all the Spirits of Heav'n By him created in thir bright degrees, Crownd them with Glory, & to thir Glory nam'd Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscur'd, But more illustrious made, since he the Head One of our number thus reduc't becomes, His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage, And tempt not these; but hast'n to appease Th' incensed Father, and th' incensed Son, While Pardon may be found in time besought. So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeale None seconded, as out of season judg'd, Or singular and rash, whereat rejoic'd Th' Apostat, and more haughty thus repli'd. That we were formd then saist thou? & the work Of secondarie hands, by task transferd From Father to his Son? strange point and new! Doctrin which we would know whence learnt: who saw When this creation was? rememberst thou Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being? We know no time when we were not as now; Know none before us, self-begot, self-rais'd By our own quick'ning power, when fatal course Had circl'd his full Orbe, the birth mature Of this our native Heav'n, Ethereal Sons. Our puissance is our own, our own right hand Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold Whether by supplication we intend Address, and to begirt th' Almighty Throne Beseeching or besieging. This report, These tidings carrie to th' anointed King; And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. He said, and as the sound of waters deep Hoarce murmur echo'd to his words applause Through the infinite Host, nor less for that The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone Encompass'd round with foes, thus answerd bold. O alienate from God, O spirit accurst, Forsak'n of all good; I see thy fall Determind, and thy hapless crew involv'd In this perfidious fraud, contagion spred Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth No more be troubl'd how to quit the yoke Of Gods MESSIAH; those indulgent Laws Will not be now voutsaf't, other Decrees Against thee are gon forth without recall; That Golden Scepter which thou didst reject Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and breake Thy disobedience. Well thou didst advise, Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrauth Impendent, raging into sudden flame Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire. Then who created thee lamenting learne, When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know. So spake the Seraph ABDIEL faithful found, Among the faithless, faithful only hee; Among innumerable false, unmov'd, Unshak'n, unseduc'd, unterrifi'd His Loyaltie he kept, his Love, his Zeale; Nor number, nor example with him wrought To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind Though single. From amidst them forth he passd, Long way through hostile scorn, which he susteind Superior, nor of violence fear'd aught; And with retorted scorn his back he turn'd On those proud Towrs to swift destruction doom'd. All night the dreadless Angel unpursu'd Through Heav'ns wide Champain held his way, till Morn, Wak't by the circling Hours, with rosie hand Unbarr'd the gates of Light. There is a Cave Within the Mount of God, fast by his Throne, Where light and darkness in perpetual round Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heav'n Grateful vicissitude, like Day and Night; Light issues forth, and at the other dore Obsequious darkness enters, till her houre To veile the Heav'n, though darkness there might well Seem twilight here; and now went forth the Morn Such as in highest Heav'n, arrayd in Gold Empyreal, from before her vanisht Night, Shot through with orient Beams: when all the Plain Coverd with thick embatteld Squadrons bright, Chariots and flaming Armes, and fierie Steeds Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view: Warr he perceav'd, warr in procinct, and found Already known what he for news had thought To have reported: gladly then he mixt Among those friendly Powers who him receav'd With joy and acclamations loud, that one That of so many Myriads fall'n, yet one Returnd not lost: On to the sacred hill They led him high applauded, and present Before the seat supream; from whence a voice From midst a Golden Cloud thus milde was heard. Servant of God, well done, well hast thou fought The better fight, who single hast maintaind Against revolted multitudes the Cause Of Truth, in word mightier then they in Armes; And for the testimonie of Truth hast born Universal reproach, far worse to beare Then violence: for this was all thy care To stand approv'd in sight of God, though Worlds Judg'd thee perverse: the easier conquest now Remains thee, aided by this host of friends, Back on thy foes more glorious to return Then scornd thou didst depart, and to subdue By force, who reason for thir Law refuse, Right reason for thir Law, and for thir King MESSIAH, who by right of merit Reigns. Goe MICHAEL of Celestial Armies Prince, And thou in Military prowess next GABRIEL, lead forth to Battel these my Sons Invincible, lead forth my armed Saints By Thousands and by Millions rang'd for fight; Equal in number to that Godless crew Rebellious, them with Fire and hostile Arms Fearless assault, and to the brow of Heav'n Pursuing drive them out from God and bliss, Into thir place of punishment, the Gulf Of TARTARUS, which ready opens wide His fiery CHAOS to receave thir fall. So spake the Sovran voice, and Clouds began To darken all the Hill, and smoak to rowl In duskie wreathes, reluctant flames, the signe Of wrauth awak't: nor with less dread the loud Ethereal Trumpet from on high gan blow: At which command the Powers Militant, That stood for Heav'n, in mighty Quadrate joyn'd Of Union irresistible, mov'd on In silence thir bright Legions, to the sound Of instrumental Harmonie that breath'd Heroic Ardor to advent'rous deeds Under thir God-like Leaders, in the Cause Of God and his MESSIAH. On they move Indissolubly firm; nor obvious Hill, Nor streit'ning Vale, nor Wood, nor Stream divides Thir perfet ranks; for high above the ground Thir march was, and the passive Air upbore Thir nimble tread; as when the total kind Of Birds in orderly array on wing Came summond over EDEN to receive Thir names of thee; so over many a tract Of Heav'n they march'd, and many a Province wide Tenfold the length of this terrene: at last Farr in th' Horizon to the North appeer'd From skirt to skirt a fierie Region, stretcht In battailous aspect, and neerer view Bristl'd with upright beams innumerable Of rigid Spears, and Helmets throng'd, and Shields Various, with boastful Argument portraid, The banded Powers of SATAN hasting on With furious expedition; for they weend That self same day by fight, or by surprize To set the envier of his State, the proud Aspirer, but thir thoughts prov'd fond and vain In the mid way: though strange to us it seemd At first, that Angel should with Angel warr, And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet So oft in Festivals of joy and love Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire Hymning th' Eternal Father: but the shout Of Battel now began, and rushing sound Of onset ended soon each milder thought. High in the midst exalted as a God Th' Apostat in his Sun-bright Chariot sate Idol of Majestie Divine, enclos'd With Flaming Cherubim, and golden Shields; Then lighted from his gorgeous Throne, for now 'Twixt Host and Host but narrow space was left, A dreadful interval, and Front to Front Presented stood in terrible array Of hideous length: before the cloudie Van, On the rough edge of battel ere it joyn'd, SATAN with vast and haughtie strides advanc't, Came towring, armd in Adamant and Gold; ABDIEL that sight endur'd not, where he stood Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds, And thus his own undaunted heart explores. O Heav'n! that such resemblance of the Highest Should yet remain, where faith and realtie Remain not; wherfore should not strength & might There fail where Vertue fails, or weakest prove Where boldest; though to sight unconquerable? His puissance, trusting in th' Almightie's aide, I mean to try, whose Reason I have tri'd Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just, That he who in debate of Truth hath won, Should win in Arms, in both disputes alike Victor; though brutish that contest and foule, When Reason hath to deal with force, yet so Most reason is that Reason overcome. So pondering, and from his armed Peers Forth stepping opposite, half way he met His daring foe, at this prevention more Incens't, and thus securely him defi'd. Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reacht The highth of thy aspiring unoppos'd, The Throne of God unguarded, and his side Abandond at the terror of thy Power Or potent tongue; fool, not to think how vain Against th' Omnipotent to rise in Arms; Who out of smallest things could without end Have rais'd incessant Armies to defeat Thy folly; or with solitarie hand Reaching beyond all limit, at one blow Unaided could have finisht thee, and whelmd Thy Legions under darkness; but thou seest All are not of thy Train; there be who Faith Prefer, and Pietie to God, though then To thee not visible, when I alone Seemd in thy World erroneous to dissent From all: my Sect thou seest, now learn too late How few somtimes may know, when thousands err. Whom the grand foe with scornful eye askance Thus answerd. Ill for thee, but in wisht houre Of my revenge, first sought for thou returnst From flight, seditious Angel, to receave Thy merited reward, the first assay Of this right hand provok't, since first that tongue Inspir'd with contradiction durst oppose A third part of the Gods, in Synod met Thir Deities to assert, who while they feel Vigour Divine within them, can allow Omnipotence to none. But well thou comst Before thy fellows, ambitious to win From me som Plume, that thy success may show Destruction to the rest: this pause between Unanswerd least thou boast to let thee know; At first I thought that Libertie and Heav'n To heav'nly Soules had bin all one; but now I see that most through sloth had rather serve, Ministring Spirits, traind up in Feast and Song; Such hast thou arm'd, the Minstrelsie of Heav'n, Servilitie with freedom to contend, As both thir deeds compar'd this day shall prove. To whom in brief thus ABDIEL stern repli'd. Apostat, still thou errst, nor end wilt find Of erring, from the path of truth remote: Unjustly thou deprav'st it with the name Of SERVITUDE to serve whom God ordains, Or Nature; God and Nature bid the same, When he who rules is worthiest, and excells Them whom he governs. This is servitude, To serve th' unwise, or him who hath rebelld Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee, Thy self not free, but to thy self enthrall'd; Yet leudly dar'st our ministring upbraid. Reign thou in Hell thy Kingdom, let mee serve In Heav'n God ever blessed, and his Divine Behests obey, worthiest to be obey'd, Yet Chains in Hell, not Realms expect: mean while From mee returnd, as erst thou saidst, from flight, This greeting on thy impious Crest receive. So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high, Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell On the proud Crest of SATAN, that no sight, Nor motion of swift thought, less could his Shield Such ruin intercept: ten paces huge He back recoild; the tenth on bended knee His massie Spear upstaid; as if on Earth Winds under ground or waters forcing way Sidelong, had push't a Mountain from his seat Half sunk with all his Pines. Amazement seis'd The Rebel Thrones, but greater rage to see Thus foil'd thir mightiest, ours joy filld, and shout, Presage of Victorie and fierce desire Of Battel: whereat MICHAEL bid sound Th' Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heav'n It sounded, and the faithful Armies rung HOSANNA to the Highest: nor stood at gaze The adverse Legions, nor less hideous joyn'd The horrid shock: now storming furie rose, And clamour such as heard in Heav'n till now Was never, Arms on Armour clashing bray'd Horrible discord, and the madding Wheeles Of brazen Chariots rag'd; dire was the noise Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss Of fiery Darts in flaming volies flew, And flying vaulted either Host with fire. Sounder fierie Cope together rush'd Both Battels maine, with ruinous assault And inextinguishable rage; all Heav'n Resounded, and had Earth bin then, all Earth Had to her Center shook. What wonder? when Millions of fierce encountring Angels fought On either side, the least of whom could weild These Elements, and arm him with the force Of all thir Regions: how much more of Power Armie against Armie numberless to raise Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb, Though not destroy, thir happie Native seat; From his strong hold of Heav'n high over-rul'd And limited thir might; though numberd such As each divided Legion might have seemd A numerous Host, in strength each armed hand A Legion; led in fight, yet Leader seemd Each Warriour single as in Chief, expert When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway Of Battel, open when, and when to close The ridges of grim Warr; no thought of flight, None of retreat, no unbecoming deed That argu'd fear; each on himself reli'd, As onely in his arm the moment lay Of victorie; deeds of eternal fame Were don, but infinite: for wide was spred That Warr and various; somtimes on firm ground A standing fight, then soaring on main wing Tormented all the Air; all Air seemd then Conflicting Fire: long time in eeven scale The Battel hung; till SATAN, who that day Prodigious power had shewn, and met in Armes No equal, raunging through the dire attack Of fighting Seraphim confus'd, at length Saw where the Sword of MICHAEL smote, and fell'd Squadrons at once, with huge two-handed sway Brandisht aloft the horrid edge came down Wide wasting; such destruction to withstand He hasted, and oppos'd the rockie Orb Of tenfold Adamant, his ample Shield A vast circumference: At his approach The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toile Surceas'd, and glad as hoping here to end Intestine War in Heav'n, the arch foe subdu'd Or Captive drag'd in Chains, with hostile frown And visage all enflam'd first thus began. Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt, Unnam'd in Heav'n, now plenteous, as thou seest These Acts of hateful strife, hateful to all, Though heaviest by just measure on thy self And thy adherents: how hast thou disturb'd Heav'ns blessed peace, and into Nature brought Miserie, uncreated till the crime Of thy Rebellion? how hast thou instill'd Thy malice into thousands, once upright And faithful, now prov'd false. But think not here To trouble Holy Rest; Heav'n casts thee out From all her Confines. Heav'n the seat of bliss Brooks not the works of violence and Warr. Hence then, and evil go with thee along Thy ofspring, to the place of evil, Hell, Thou and thy wicked crew; there mingle broiles, Ere this avenging Sword begin thy doome, Or som more sudden vengeance wing'd from God Precipitate thee with augmented paine. So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus The Adversarie. Nor think thou with wind Of airie threats to aw whom yet with deeds Thou canst not. Hast thou turnd the least of these To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise Unvanquisht, easier to transact with mee That thou shouldst hope, imperious, & with threats To chase me hence? erre not that so shall end The strife which thou call'st evil, but wee style The strife of Glorie: which we mean to win, Or turn this Heav'n it self into the Hell Thou fablest, here however to dwell free, If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force, And join him nam'd ALMIGHTIE to thy aid, I flie not, but have sought thee farr and nigh. They ended parle, and both addrest for fight Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue Of Angels, can relate, or to what things Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift Human imagination to such highth Of Godlike Power: for likest Gods they seemd, Stood they or mov'd, in stature, motion, arms Fit to decide the Empire of great Heav'n. Now wav'd thir fierie Swords, and in the Aire Made horrid Circles; two broad Suns thir Shields Blaz'd opposite, while expectation stood In horror; from each hand with speed retir'd Where erst was thickest fight, th' Angelic throng, And left large field, unsafe within the wind Of such commotion, such as to set forth Great things by small, If Natures concord broke, Among the Constellations warr were sprung, Two Planets rushing from aspect maligne Of fiercest opposition in mid Skie, Should combat, and thir jarring Sphears confound. Together both with next to Almightie Arme, Uplifted imminent one stroke they aim'd That might determine, and not need repeate, As not of power, at once; nor odds appeerd In might or swift prevention; but the sword Of MICHAEL from the Armorie of God Was giv'n him temperd so, that neither keen Nor solid might resist that edge: it met The sword of SATAN with steep force to smite Descending, and in half cut sheere, nor staid, But with swift wheele reverse, deep entring shar'd All his right side; then SATAN first knew pain, And writh'd him to and fro convolv'd; so sore The griding sword with discontinuous wound Pass'd through him, but th' Ethereal substance clos'd Not long divisible, and from the gash A stream of Nectarous humor issuing flow'd Sanguin, such as Celestial Spirits may bleed, And all his Armour staind ere while so bright. Forthwith on all sides to his aide was run By Angels many and strong, who interpos'd Defence, while others bore him on thir Shields Back to his Chariot; where it stood retir'd From off the files of warr; there they him laid Gnashing for anguish and despite and shame To find himself not matchless, and his pride Humbl'd by such rebuke, so farr beneath His confidence to equal God in power. Yet soon he heal'd; for Spirits that live throughout Vital in every part, not as frail man Cannot but by annihilating die; Nor in thir liquid texture mortal wound Receive, no more then can the fluid Aire: All Heart they live, all Head, all Eye, all Eare, All Intellect, all Sense, and as they please, They Limb themselves, and colour, shape or size Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare. Mean while in other parts like deeds deservd Memorial, where the might of GABRIEL fought, And with fierce Ensignes pierc'd the deep array Of MOLOC furious King, who him defi'd, And at his Chariot wheeles to drag him bound Threatn'd, nor from the Holie One of Heav'n Refrein'd his tongue blasphemous; but anon Down clov'n to the waste, with shatterd Armes And uncouth paine fled bellowing. On each wing URIEL and RAPHAEL his vaunting foe, Though huge, and in a Rock of Diamond Armd, Vanquish'd ADRAMELEC, and ASMADAI, Two potent Thrones, that to be less then Gods Disdain'd, but meaner thoughts learnd in thir flight, Mangl'd with gastly wounds through Plate and Maile. Nor stood unmindful ABDIEL to annoy The Atheist crew, but with redoubl'd blow ARIEL and ARIOC, and the violence Of RAMIEL scorcht and blasted overthrew. I might relate of thousands, and thir names Eternize here on Earth; but those elect Angels contented with thir fame in Heav'n Seek not the praise of men: the other sort In might though wondrous and in Acts of Warr, Nor of Renown less eager, yet by doome Canceld from Heav'n and sacred memorie, Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell. For strength from Truth divided and from Just, Illaudable, naught merits but dispraise And ignominie, yet to glorie aspires Vain glorious, and through infamie seeks fame: Therfore Eternal silence be thir doome. And now thir mightiest quelld, the battel swerv'd, With many an inrode gor'd; deformed rout Enter'd, and foul disorder; all the ground With shiverd armour strow'n, and on a heap Chariot and Charioter lay overturnd And fierie foaming Steeds; what stood, recoyld Orewearied, through the faint Satanic Host Defensive scarse, or with pale fear surpris'd, Then first with fear surpris'd and sense of paine Fled ignominious, to such evil brought By sinne of disobedience, till that hour Not liable to fear or flight or paine. Far otherwise th' inviolable Saints In Cubic Phalanx firm advanc't entire, Invulnerable, impenitrably arm'd: Such high advantages thir innocence Gave them above thir foes, not to have sinnd, Not to have disobei'd; in fight they stood Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pain'd By wound, though from thir place by violence mov'd. Now Night her course began, and over Heav'n Inducing darkness, grateful truce impos'd, And silence on the odious dinn of Warr: Under her Cloudie covert both retir'd, Victor and Vanquisht: on the foughten field MICHAEL and his Angels prevalent Encamping, plac'd in Guard thir Watches round, Cherubic waving fires: on th' other part SATAN with his rebellious disappeerd, Far in the dark dislodg'd, and void of rest, His Potentates to Councel call'd by night; And in the midst thus undismai'd began. O now in danger tri'd, now known in Armes Not to be overpowerd, Companions deare, Found worthy not of Libertie alone, Too mean pretense, but what we more affect, Honour, Dominion, Glorie, and renowne, Who have sustaind one day in doubtful fight, And if one day, why not Eternal dayes? What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send Against us from about his Throne, and judg'd Sufficient to subdue us to his will, But proves not so: then fallible, it seems, Of future we may deem him, though till now Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly arm'd, Some disadvantage we endur'd and paine, Till now not known, but known as soon contemnd, Since now we find this our Empyreal forme Incapable of mortal injurie Imperishable, and though peirc'd with wound, Soon closing, and by native vigour heal'd. Of evil then so small as easie think The remedie; perhaps more valid Armes, Weapons more violent, when next we meet, May serve to better us, and worse our foes, Or equal what between us made the odds, In Nature none: if other hidden cause Left them Superiour, while we can preserve Unhurt our mindes, and understanding sound, Due search and consultation will disclose. He sat; and in th' assembly next upstood NISROC, of Principalities the prime; As one he stood escap't from cruel fight, Sore toild, his riv'n Armes to havoc hewn, And cloudie in aspect thus answering spake. Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard For Gods, and too unequal work we find Against unequal armes to fight in paine, Against unpaind, impassive; from which evil Ruin must needs ensue; for what availes Valour or strength, though matchless, quelld with pain Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands Of Mightiest. Sense of pleasure we may well Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine, But live content, which is the calmest life: But pain is perfet miserie, the worst Of evils, and excessive, overturnes All patience. He who therefore can invent With what more forcible we may offend Our yet unwounded Enemies, or arme Our selves with like defence, to mee deserves No less then for deliverance what we owe. Whereto with look compos'd SATAN repli'd. Not uninvented that, which thou aright Beleivst so main to our success, I bring; Which of us who beholds the bright surface Of this Ethereous mould whereon we stand, This continent of spacious Heav'n, adornd Whose Eye so superficially surveyes These things, as not to mind from whence they grow Deep under ground, materials dark and crude, Of spiritous and fierie spume, till toucht With Heav'ns ray, and temperd they shoot forth So beauteous, op'ning to the ambient light. These in thir dark Nativitie the Deep Shall yeild us, pregnant with infernal flame, Which into hallow Engins long and round Thick-rammd, at th' other bore with touch of fire Dilated and infuriate shall send forth From far with thundring noise among our foes Such implements of mischief as shall dash To pieces, and orewhelm whatever stands Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmd The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt. Nor long shall be our labour, yet ere dawne, Effect shall end our wish. Mean while revive; Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joind Think nothing hard, much less to be despaird. He ended, and his words thir drooping chere Enlightn'd, and thir languisht hope reviv'd. Th' invention all admir'd, and each, how hee To be th' inventer miss'd, so easie it seemd Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought Impossible: yet haply of thy Race In future dayes, if Malice should abound, Some one intent on mischief, or inspir'd With dev'lish machination might devise Like instrument to plague the Sons of men For sin, on warr and mutual slaughter bent. Forthwith from Councel to the work they flew, None arguing stood, innumerable hands Were ready, in a moment up they turnd Wide the Celestial soile, and saw beneath Th' originals of Nature in thir crude They found, they mingl'd, and with suttle Art, Concocted and adusted they reduc'd To blackest grain, and into store conveyd: Part hidd'n veins diggd up nor hath this Earth Entrails unlike of Mineral and Stone, Whereof to found thir Engins and thir Balls Of missive ruin; part incentive reed Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. So all ere day spring, under conscious Night Secret they finish'd, and in order set, With silent circumspection unespi'd. Now when fair Morn Orient in Heav'n appeerd Up rose the Victor Angels, and to Arms The matin Trumpet Sung: in Arms they stood Of Golden Panoplie, refulgent Host, Soon banded; others from the dawning Hills Lookd round, and Scouts each Coast light-armed scoure, Each quarter, to descrie the distant foe, Where lodg'd, or whither fled, or if for fight, In motion or in alt: him soon they met Under spred Ensignes moving nigh, in slow But firm Battalion; back with speediest Sail ZEPHIEL, of Cherubim the swiftest wing, Came flying, and in mid Aire aloud thus cri'd. Arme, Warriours, Arme for fight, the foe at hand, Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit This day, fear not his flight; so thick a Cloud He comes, and settl'd in his face I see Sad resolution and secure: let each His Adamantine coat gird well, and each Fit well his Helme, gripe fast his orbed Shield, Born eevn or high, for this day will pour down, If I conjecture aught, no drizling showr, But ratling storm of Arrows barbd with fire. So warnd he them aware themselves, and soon In order, quit of all impediment; Instant without disturb they took Allarm, And onward move Embattelld; when behold Not distant far with heavie pace the Foe Approaching gross and huge; in hollow Cube Training his devilish Enginrie, impal'd On every side with shaddowing Squadrons Deep, To hide the fraud. At interview both stood A while, but suddenly at head appeerd SATAN: And thus was heard Commanding loud. Vangard, to Right and Left the Front unfould; That all may see who hate us, how we seek Peace and composure, and with open brest Stand readie to receive them, if they like Our overture, and turn not back perverse; But that I doubt, however witness Heaven, Heav'n witness thou anon, while we discharge Freely our part: yee who appointed stand Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch What we propound, and loud that all may hear. So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce Had ended; when to Right and Left the Front Divided, and to either Flank retir'd. Which to our eyes discoverd new and strange, A triple-mounted row of Pillars laid On Wheels for like to Pillars most they seem'd Or hollow'd bodies made of Oak or Firr With branches lopt, in Wood or Mountain fell'd Brass, Iron, Stonie mould, had not thir mouthes With hideous orifice gap't on us wide, Portending hollow truce; at each behind A Seraph stood, and in his hand a Reed Stood waving tipt with fire; while we suspense, Collected stood within our thoughts amus'd, Not long, for sudden all at once thir Reeds Put forth, and to a narrow vent appli'd With nicest touch. Immediate in a flame, But soon obscur'd with smoak, all Heav'n appeerd, From those deep-throated Engins belcht, whose roar Emboweld with outragious noise the Air, And all her entrails tore, disgorging foule Thir devillish glut, chaind Thunderbolts and Hail Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host Level'd, with such impetuous furie smote, That whom they hit, none on thir feet might stand, Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rowl'd; The sooner for thir Arms, unarm'd they might Have easily as Spirits evaded swift By quick contraction or remove; but now Foule dissipation follow'd and forc't rout; Nor serv'd it to relax thir serried files. What should they do? if on they rusht, repulse Repeated, and indecent overthrow Doubl'd, would render them yet more despis'd, And to thir foes a laughter; for in view Stood rankt of Seraphim another row In posture to displode thir second tire Of Thunder: back defeated to return They worse abhorr'd. SATAN beheld thir plight, And to his Mates thus in derision call'd. O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud? Ere while they fierce were coming, and when wee, To entertain them fair with open Front And Brest, what could we more? propounded terms Of composition, strait they chang'd thir minds, Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell, As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemd Somwhat extravagant and wilde, perhaps For joy of offerd peace: but I suppose If our proposals once again were heard We should compel them to a quick result. To whom thus BELIAL in like gamesom mood. Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight, Of hard contents, and full of force urg'd home, Such as we might perceive amus'd them all, And stumbl'd many, who receives them right, Had need from head to foot well understand; Not understood, this gift they have besides, They shew us when our foes walk not upright. So they among themselves in pleasant veine Stood scoffing, highthn'd in thir thoughts beyond All doubt of Victorie, eternal might To match with thir inventions they presum'd So easie, and of his Thunder made a scorn, And all his Host derided, while they stood A while in trouble; but they stood not long, Rage prompted them at length, & found them arms Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose. Forthwith behold the excellence, the power Which God hath in his mighty Angels plac'd Thir Arms away they threw, and to the Hills For Earth hath this variety from Heav'n Of pleasure situate in Hill and Dale Light as the Lightning glimps they ran, they flew, From thir foundations loosning to and fro They pluckt the seated Hills with all thir load, Rocks, Waters, Woods, and by the shaggie tops Up lifting bore them in thir hands: Amaze, Be sure, and terrour seis'd the rebel Host, When coming towards them so dread they saw The bottom of the Mountains upward turn'd, Till on those cursed Engins triple-row They saw them whelmd, and all thir confidence Under the weight of Mountains buried deep, Themselves invaded next, and on thir heads Main Promontories flung, which in the Air Came shadowing, and opprest whole Legions arm'd, Thir armor help'd thir harm, crush't in and brus'd Into thir substance pent, which wrought them pain Implacable, and many a dolorous groan, Long strugling underneath, ere they could wind Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light, Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown. The rest in imitation to like Armes Betook them, and the neighbouring Hills uptore; So Hills amid the Air encounterd Hills Hurl'd to and fro with jaculation dire, That under ground they fought in dismal shade; Infernal noise; Warr seem'd a civil Game To this uproar; horrid confusion heapt Upon confusion rose: and now all Heav'n Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspred, Had not th' Almightie Father where he sits Shrin'd in his Sanctuarie of Heav'n secure, Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen This tumult, and permitted all, advis'd: That his great purpose he might so fulfill, To honour his Anointed Son aveng'd Upon his enemies, and to declare All power on him transferr'd: whence to his Son Th' Assessor of his Throne he thus began. Effulgence of my Glorie, Son belov'd, Son in whose face invisible is beheld Visibly, what by Deitie I am, And in whose hand what by Decree I doe, Second Omnipotence, two dayes are past, Two dayes, as we compute the dayes of Heav'n, Since MICHAEL and his Powers went forth to tame These disobedient; sore hath been thir fight, As likeliest was, when two such Foes met arm'd; For to themselves I left them, and thou knowst, Equal in their Creation they were form'd, Save what sin hath impaird, which yet hath wrought Insensibly, for I suspend thir doom; Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last Endless, and no solution will be found: Warr wearied hath perform'd what Warr can do, And to disorder'd rage let loose the reines, With Mountains as with Weapons arm'd, which makes Wild work in Heav'n, and dangerous to the maine. Two dayes are therefore past, the third is thine; For thee I have ordain'd it, and thus farr Have sufferd, that the Glorie may be thine Of ending this great Warr, since none but Thou Can end it. Into thee such Vertue and Grace Immense I have transfus'd, that all may know In Heav'n and Hell thy Power above compare, And this perverse Commotion governd thus, To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir Of all things, to be Heir and to be King By Sacred Unction, thy deserved right. Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might, Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheeles That shake Heav'ns basis, bring forth all my Warr, Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh; Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out From all Heav'ns bounds into the utter Deep: There let them learn, as likes them, to despise God and MESSIAH his anointed King. He said, and on his Son with Rayes direct Shon full, he all his Father full exprest Ineffably into his face receiv'd, And thus the filial Godhead answering spake. O Father, O Supream of heav'nly Thrones, First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou alwayes seekst To glorifie thy Son, I alwayes thee, As is most just; this I my Glorie account, My exaltation, and my whole delight, That thou in me well pleas'd, declarst thy will Fulfill'd, which to fulfil is all my bliss. Scepter and Power, thy giving, I assume, And gladlier shall resign, when in the end Thou shalt be All in All, and I in thee For ever, and in mee all whom thou lov'st: But whom thou hat'st, I hate, and can put on Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on, Image of thee in all things; and shall soon, Armd with thy might, rid heav'n of these rebell'd, To thir prepar'd ill Mansion driven down To chains of Darkness, and th' undying Worm, That from thy just obedience could revolt, Whom to obey is happiness entire. Then shall thy Saints unmixt, and from th' impure Farr separate, circling thy holy Mount Unfained HALLELUIAHS to thee sing, Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief. So said, he o're his Scepter bowing, rose From the right hand of Glorie where he sate, And the third sacred Morn began to shine Dawning through Heav'n: forth rush'd with whirlwind sound Flashing thick flames, Wheele within Wheele undrawn, It self instinct with Spirit, but convoyd By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each Had wondrous, as with Starrs thir bodies all And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the Wheels Of Beril, and careering Fires between; Over thir heads a chrystal Firmament, Whereon a Saphir Throne, inlaid with pure Amber, and colours of the showrie Arch. Hee in Celestial Panoplie all armd Of radiant URIM, work divinely wrought, Ascended, at his right hand Victorie Sate Eagle-wing'd, beside him hung his Bow And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stor'd, And from about him fierce Effusion rowld Of smoak and bickering flame, and sparkles dire; Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints, He onward came, farr off his coming shon, And twentie thousand I thir number heard Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen: Hee on the wings of Cherub rode sublime On the Crystallin Skie, in Saphir Thron'd. Illustrious farr and wide, but by his own First seen, them unexpected joy surpriz'd, When the great Ensign of MESSIAH blaz'd Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heav'n: Under whose Conduct MICHAEL soon reduc'd His Armie, circumfus'd on either Wing, Under thir Head imbodied all in one. Before him Power Divine his way prepar'd; At his command the uprooted Hills retir'd Each to his place, they heard his voice and went Obsequious, Heav'n his wonted face renewd, And with fresh Flourets Hill and Valley smil'd. This saw his hapless Foes, but stood obdur'd, And to rebellious fight rallied thir Powers Insensate, hope conceiving from despair. In heav'nly Spirits could such perverseness dwell? But to convince the proud what Signs availe, Or Wonders move th' obdurate to relent? They hard'nd more by what might most reclame, Grieving to see his Glorie, at the sight Took envie, and aspiring to his highth, Stood reimbattell'd fierce, by force or fraud Weening to prosper, and at length prevaile Against God and MESSIAH, or to fall In universal ruin last, and now To final Battel drew, disdaining flight, Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God To all his Host on either hand thus spake. Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here stand Ye Angels arm'd, this day from Battel rest; Faithful hath been your Warfare, and of God Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause, And as ye have receivd, so have ye don Invincibly; but of this cursed crew The punishment to other hand belongs, Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints; Number to this dayes work is not ordain'd Nor multitude, stand onely and behold Gods indignation on these Godless pourd By mee; not you but mee they have despis'd, Yet envied; against mee is all thir rage, Because the Father, t' whom in Heav'n supream Kingdom and Power and Glorie appertains, Hath honourd me according to his will. Therefore to mee thir doom he hath assig'n'd; That they may have thir wish, to trie with mee In Battel which the stronger proves, they all, Or I alone against them, since by strength They measure all, of other excellence Not emulous, nor care who them excells; Nor other strife with them do I voutsafe. So spake the Son, and into terrour chang'd His count'nance too severe to be beheld And full of wrauth bent on his Enemies. At once the Four spred out thir Starrie wings With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbes Of his fierce Chariot rowld, as with the sound Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host. Hee on his impious Foes right onward drove, Gloomie as Night; under his burning Wheeles The stedfast Empyrean shook throughout, All but the Throne it self of God. Full soon Among them he arriv'd; in his right hand Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent Before him, such as in thir Soules infix'd Plagues; they astonisht all resistance lost, All courage; down thir idle weapons drop'd; O're Shields and Helmes, and helmed heads he rode Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate, That wish'd the Mountains now might be again Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire. Nor less on either side tempestuous fell His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd Foure, Distinct with eyes, and from the living Wheels, Distinct alike with multitude of eyes, One Spirit in them rul'd, and every eye Glar'd lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire Among th' accurst, that witherd all thir strength, And of thir wonted vigour left them draind, Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fall'n. Yet half his strength he put not forth, but check'd His Thunder in mid Volie, for he meant Not to destroy, but root them out of Heav'n: The overthrown he rais'd, and as a Heard Of Goats or timerous flock together throngd Drove them before him Thunder-struck, pursu'd With terrors and with furies to the bounds And Chrystall wall of Heav'n, which op'ning wide, Rowld inward, and a spacious Gap disclos'd Into the wastful Deep; the monstrous sight Strook them with horror backward, but far worse Urg'd them behind; headlong themselvs they threw Down from the verge of Heav'n, Eternal wrauth Burnt after them to the bottomless pit. Hell heard th' unsufferable noise, Hell saw Heav'n ruining from Heav'n and would have fled Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound. Nine dayes they fell; confounded CHAOS roard, And felt tenfold confusion in thir fall Through his wilde Anarchie, so huge a rout Incumberd him with ruin: Hell at last Yawning receavd them whole, and on them clos'd, Hell thir fit habitation fraught with fire Unquenchable, the house of woe and paine. Disburd'nd Heav'n rejoic'd, and soon repaird Her mural breach, returning whence it rowld. Sole Victor from th' expulsion of his Foes MESSIAH his triumphal Chariot turnd: To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood Eye witnesses of his Almightie Acts, With Jubilie advanc'd; and as they went, Shaded with branching Palme, each order bright, Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King, Son, Heire, and Lord, to him Dominion giv'n, Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode Triumphant through mid Heav'n, into the Courts And Temple of his mightie Father Thron'd On high; who into Glorie him receav'd, Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss. Thus measuring things in Heav'n by things on Earth At thy request, and that thou maist beware By what is past, to thee I have reveal'd What might have else to human Race bin hid; The discord which befel, and Warr in Heav'n Among th' Angelic Powers, and the deep fall Of those too high aspiring, who rebelld With SATAN, hee who envies now thy state, Who now is plotting how he may seduce Thee also from obedience, that with him Bereavd of happiness thou maist partake His punishment, Eternal miserie; Which would be all his solace and revenge, As a despite don against the most High, Thee once to gaine Companion of his woe. But list'n not to his Temptations, warne Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard By terrible Example the reward Of disobedience; firm they might have stood, Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress. Descend from Heav'n URANIA, by that name If rightly thou art call'd, whose Voice divine Following, above th' OLYMPIAN Hill I soare, Above the flight of PEGASEAN wing. The meaning, not the Name I call: for thou Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top Of old OLYMPUS dwell'st, but Heav'nlie borne, Before the Hills appeerd, or Fountain flow'd, Thou with Eternal wisdom didst converse, Wisdom thy Sister, and with her didst play In presence of th' Almightie Father, pleas'd With thy Celestial Song. Up led by thee Into the Heav'n of Heav'ns I have presum'd, An Earthlie Guest, and drawn Empyreal Aire, Thy tempring; with like safetie guided down Least from this flying Steed unrein'd, as once BELLEROPHON, though from a lower Clime Dismounted, on th' ALEIAN Field I fall Erroneous, there to wander and forlorne. Half yet remaines unsung, but narrower bound Within the visible Diurnal Spheare; Standing on Earth, not rapt above the Pole, More safe I Sing with mortal voice, unchang'd To hoarce or mute, though fall'n on evil dayes, On evil dayes though fall'n, and evil tongues; In darkness, and with dangers compast rouud, And solitude; yet not alone, while thou Visit'st my slumbers Nightly, or when Morn Purples the East: still govern thou my Song, URANIA, and fit audience find, though few. But drive farr off the barbarous dissonance Of BACCHUS and his Revellers, the Race Of that wilde Rout that tore the THRACIAN Bard In RHODOPE, where Woods and Rocks had Eares To rapture, till the savage clamor dround Both Harp and Voice; nor could the Muse defend Her Son. So fail not thou, who thee implores: For thou art Heav'nlie, shee an empty dreame. Say Goddess, what ensu'd when RAPHAEL, The affable Arch-angel, had forewarn'd ADAM by dire example to beware Apostasie, by what befell in Heaven To those Apostates, least the like befall In Paradise to ADAM or his Race, Charg'd not to touch the interdicted Tree, If they transgress, and slight that sole command, So easily obeyd amid the choice Of all tasts else to please thir appetite, Though wandring. He with his consorted EVE The storie heard attentive, and was fill'd With admiration, and deep Muse to heare Of things so high and strange, things to thir thought So unimaginable as hate in Heav'n, And Warr so neer the Peace of God in bliss With such confusion: but the evil soon Driv'n back redounded as a flood on those From whom it sprung, impossible to mix With Blessedness. Whence ADAM soon repeal'd The doubts that in his heart arose: and now Led on, yet sinless, with desire to know What neerer might concern him, how this World Of Heav'n and Earth conspicuous first began, When, and whereof created, for what cause, What within EDEN or without was done Before his memorie, as one whose drouth Yet scarce allay'd still eyes the current streame, Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites, Proceeded thus to ask his Heav'nly Guest. Great things, and full of wonder in our eares, Farr differing from this World, thou hast reveal'd Divine Interpreter, by favour sent Down from the Empyrean to forewarne Us timely of what might else have bin our loss, Unknown, which human knowledg could not reach: For which to the infinitly Good we owe Immortal thanks, and his admonishment Receave with solemne purpose to observe Immutably his sovran will, the end Of what we are. But since thou hast voutsaf't Gently for our instruction to impart Things above Earthly thought, which yet concernd Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemd, Deign to descend now lower, and relate What may no less perhaps availe us known, How first began this Heav'n which we behold Distant so high, with moving Fires adornd Innumerable, and this which yeelds or fills All space, the ambient Aire wide interfus'd Imbracing round this florid Earth, what cause Mov'd the Creator in his holy Rest Through all Eternitie so late to build In CHAOS, and the work begun, how soon Absolv'd, if unforbid thou maist unfould What wee, not to explore the secrets aske Of his Eternal Empire, but the more To magnifie his works, the more we know. And the great Light of Day yet wants to run Much of his Race though steep, suspens in Heav'n Held by thy voice, thy potent voice he heares, And longer will delay to heare thee tell His Generation, and the rising Birth Of Nature from the unapparent Deep: Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring Silence, and Sleep listning to thee will watch, Or we can bid his absence, till thy Song End, and dismiss thee ere the Morning shine. Thus ADAM his illustrous Guest besought: And thus the Godlike Angel answerd milde. This also thy request with caution askt Obtaine: though to recount Almightie works What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice, Or heart of man suffice to comprehend? Yet what thou canst attain, which best may serve To glorifie the Maker, and inferr Thee also happier, shall not be withheld Thy hearing, such Commission from above I have receav'd, to answer thy desire Of knowledge within bounds; beyond abstain To ask, nor let thine own inventions hope Things not reveal'd, which th' invisible King, Onely Omniscient, hath supprest in Night, To none communicable in Earth or Heaven: Anough is left besides to search and know. But Knowledge is as food, and needs no less Her Temperance over Appetite, to know In measure what the mind may well contain, Oppresses else with Surfet, and soon turns Know then, that after LUCIFER from Heav'n So call him, brighter once amidst the Host Of Angels, then that Starr the Starrs among Fell with his flaming Legions through the Deep Into his place, and the great Son returnd Victorious with his Saints, th' Omnipotent Eternal Father from his Throne beheld Thir multitude, and to his Son thus spake. At least our envious Foe hath fail'd, who thought All like himself rebellious, by whose aid This inaccessible high strength, the seat Of Deitie supream, us dispossest, He trusted to have seis'd, and into fraud Drew many, whom thir place knows here no more; Yet farr the greater part have kept, I see, Thir station, Heav'n yet populous retaines Number sufficient to possess her Realmes Though wide, and this high Temple to frequent With Ministeries due and solemn Rites: But least his heart exalt him in the harme Already done, to have dispeopl'd Heav'n, My damage fondly deem'd, I can repaire That detriment, if such it be to lose Self-lost, and in a moment will create Of men innumerable, there to dwell, Not here, till by degrees of merit rais'd They open to themselves at length the way Up hither, under long obedience tri'd, And Earth be chang'd to Heavn, & Heav'n to Earth, One Kingdom, Joy and Union without end. Mean while inhabit laxe, ye Powers of Heav'n, And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee This I perform, speak thou, and be it don: My overshadowing Spirit and might with thee I send along, ride forth, and bid the Deep Within appointed bounds be Heav'n and Earth, Boundless the Deep, because I am who fill Infinitude, nor vacuous the space. Though I uncircumscrib'd my self retire, And put not forth my goodness, which is free To act or not, Necessitie and Chance Approach not mee, and what I will is Fate. So spake th' Almightie, and to what he spake His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave effect. Immediate are the Acts of God, more swift Then time or motion, but to human ears Cannot without process of speech be told, So told as earthly notion can receave. Great triumph and rejoycing was in Heav'n When such was heard declar'd the Almightie's will; Glorie they sung to the most High, good will To future men, and in thir dwellings peace: Glorie to him whose just avenging ire Had driven out th' ungodly from his sight And th' habitations of the just; to him Glorie and praise, whose wisdom had ordain'd Good out of evil to create, in stead Of Spirits maligne a better Race to bring Into thir vacant room, and thence diffuse His good to Worlds and Ages infinite. So sang the Hierarchies: Mean while the Son On his great Expedition now appeer'd, Girt with Omnipotence, with Radiance crown'd Immense, and all his Father in him shon. About his Chariot numberless were pour'd And Vertues, winged Spirits, and Chariots wing'd, From the Armoury of God, where stand of old Myriads between two brazen Mountains lodg'd Against a solemn day, harnest at hand, Celestial Equipage; and now came forth Spontaneous, for within them Spirit livd, Attendant on thir Lord: Heav'n op'nd wide Her ever during Gates, Harmonious sound On golden Hinges moving, to let forth The King of Glorie in his powerful Word And Spirit coming to create new Worlds. On heav'nly ground they stood, and from the shore They view'd the vast immeasurable Abyss Outrageous as a Sea, dark, wasteful, wilde, Up from the bottom turn'd by furious windes And surging waves, as Mountains to assault Heav'ns highth, and with the Center mix the Pole. Silence, ye troubl'd waves, and thou Deep, peace, Said then th' Omnific Word, your discord end: Nor staid, but on the Wings of Cherubim Uplifted, in Paternal Glorie rode Farr into CHAOS, and the World unborn; For CHAOS heard his voice: him all his Traine Follow'd in bright procession to behold Creation, and the wonders of his might. Then staid the fervid Wheeles, and in his hand He took the golden Compasses, prepar'd In Gods Eternal store, to circumscribe This Universe, and all created things: One foot he center'd, and the other turn'd Round through the vast profunditie obscure, And said, thus farr extend, thus farr thy bounds, This be thy just Circumference, O World. Thus God the Heav'n created, thus the Earth, Matter unform'd and void: Darkness profound Cover'd th' Abyss: but on the watrie calme His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspred, And vital vertue infus'd, and vital warmth Throughout the fluid Mass, but downward purg'd The black tartareous cold infernal dregs Adverse to life: then founded, then conglob'd Like things to like, the rest to several place Disparted, and between spun out the Air, And Earth self-ballanc't on her Center hung. Let ther be Light, said God, and forthwith Light Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure Sprung from the Deep, and from her Native East To journie through the airie gloom began, Sphear'd in a radiant Cloud, for yet the Sun Was not; shee in a cloudie Tabernacle Sojourn'd the while. God saw the Light was good; And light from darkness by the Hemisphere He nam'd. Thus was the first Day Eev'n and Morn: Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung By the Celestial Quires, when Orient Light Exhaling first from Darkness they beheld; Birth-day of Heav'n and Earth; with joy and shout The hollow Universal Orb they fill'd, And touch't thir Golden Harps, & hymning prais'd God and his works, Creatour him they sung, Both when first Eevning was, and when first Morn. Again, God said, let ther be Firmament Amid the Waters, and let it divide The Waters from the Waters: and God made The Firmament, expanse of liquid, pure, Transparent, Elemental Air, diffus'd In circuit to the uttermost convex Of this great Round: partition firm and sure, The Waters underneath from those above Built on circumfluous Waters calme, in wide Crystallin Ocean, and the loud misrule Of CHAOS farr remov'd, least fierce extreames Contiguous might distemper the whole frame: And Heav'n he nam'd the Firmament: So Eev'n And Morning CHORUS sung the second Day. The Earth was form'd, but in the Womb as yet Of Waters, Embryon immature involv'd, Appeer'd not: over all the face of Earth Main Ocean flow'd, not idle, but with warme Prolific humour soft'ning all her Globe, Fermented the great Mother to conceave, Satiate with genial moisture, when God said Be gather'd now ye Waters under Heav'n Into one place, and let dry Land appeer. Immediately the Mountains huge appeer Emergent, and thir broad bare backs upheave Into the Clouds, thir tops ascend the Skie: So high as heav'd the tumid Hills, so low Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep, Capacious bed of Waters: thither they Hasted with glad precipitance, uprowld As drops on dust conglobing from the drie; Part rise in crystal Wall, or ridge direct, For haste; such flight the great command impress'd On the swift flouds: as Armies at the call Of Trumpet for of Armies thou hast heard Troop to thir Standard, so the watrie throng, Wave rowling after Wave, where way they found, If steep, with torrent rapture, if through Plaine, Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them Rock or Hill, But they, or under ground, or circuit wide With Serpent errour wandring, found thir way, And on the washie Oose deep Channels wore; Easie, e're God had bid the ground be drie, All but within those banks, where Rivers now Stream, and perpetual draw thir humid traine. The dry Land, Earth, and the great receptacle Of congregated Waters he call'd Seas: And saw that it was good, and said, Let th' Earth Put forth the verdant Grass, Herb yeilding Seed, And Fruit Tree yeilding Fruit after her kind; Whose Seed is in her self upon the Earth. He scarce had said, when the bare Earth, till then Desert and bare, unsightly, unadorn'd, Brought forth the tender Grass, whose verdure clad Her Universal Face with pleasant green, Then Herbs of every leaf, that sudden flour'd Op'ning thir various colours, and made gay Her bosom smelling sweet: and these scarce blown, Forth flourish't thick the clustring Vine, forth crept The smelling Gourd, up stood the cornie Reed Embattell'd in her field: add the humble Shrub, And Bush with frizl'd hair implicit: last Rose as in Dance the stately Trees, and spred Thir branches hung with copious Fruit; or gemm'd Thir Blossoms: with high Woods the Hills were crownd, With tufts the vallies & each fountain side, With borders long the Rivers. That Earth now Seemd like to Heav'n, a seat where Gods might dwell, Or wander with delight, and love to haunt Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rain'd Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground None was, but from the Earth a dewie Mist Went up and waterd all the ground, and each Plant of the field, which e're it was in the Earth God made, and every Herb, before it grew On the green stemm; God saw that it was good: So Eev'n and Morn recorded the Third Day. Again th' Almightie spake: Let there be Lights High in th' expanse of Heaven to divide The Day from Night; and let them be for Signes, For Seasons, and for Dayes, and circling Years, And let them be for Lights as I ordaine Thir Office in the Firmament of Heav'n To give Light on the Earth; and it was so. And God made two great Lights, great for thir use To Man, the greater to have rule by Day, The less by Night alterne: and made the Starrs, And set them in the Firmament of Heav'n To illuminate the Earth, and rule the Day In thir vicissitude, and rule the Night, And Light from Darkness to divide. God saw, Surveying his great Work, that it was good: For of Celestial Bodies first the Sun A mightie Spheare he fram'd, unlightsom first, Though of Ethereal Mould: then form'd the Moon Globose, and everie magnitude of Starrs, And sowd with Starrs the Heav'n thick as a field: Of Light by farr the greater part he took, Transplanted from her cloudie Shrine, and plac'd In the Suns Orb, made porous to receive And drink the liquid Light, firm to retaine Her gather'd beams, great Palace now of Light. Hither as to thir Fountain other Starrs Repairing, in thir gold'n Urns draw Light, And hence the Morning Planet guilds his horns; By tincture or reflection they augment Thir small peculiar, though from human sight So farr remote, with diminution seen. First in his East the glorious Lamp was seen, Regent of Day, and all th' Horizon round Invested with bright Rayes, jocond to run His Longitude through Heav'ns high rode: the gray Dawn, and the PLEIADES before him danc'd Shedding sweet influence: less bright the Moon, But opposite in leveld West was set His mirror, with full face borrowing her Light From him, for other light she needed none In that aspect, and still that distance keepes Till night, then in the East her turn she shines, Revolvd on Heav'ns great Axle, and her Reign With thousand lesser Lights dividual holds, With thousand thousand Starres, that then appeer'd Spangling the Hemisphere: then first adornd With thir bright Luminaries that Set and Rose, Glad Eevning & glad Morn crownd the fourth day. And God said, let the Waters generate Reptil with Spawn abundant, living Soule: And let Fowle flie above the Earth, with wings Displayd on the op'n Firmament of Heav'n. And God created the great Whales, and each Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously The waters generated by thir kindes, And every Bird of wing after his kinde; And saw that it was good, and bless'd them, saying, Be fruitful, multiply, and in the Seas And Lakes and running Streams the waters fill; And let the Fowle be multiply'd on the Earth. Forthwith the Sounds and Seas, each Creek & Bay With Frie innumerable swarme, and Shoales Of Fish that with thir Finns and shining Scales Glide under the green Wave, in Sculles that oft Bank the mid Sea: part single or with mate Graze the Sea weed thir pasture, & through Groves Of Coral stray, or sporting with quick glance Show to the Sun thir wav'd coats dropt with Gold, Or in thir Pearlie shells at ease, attend Moist nutriment, or under Rocks thir food In jointed Armour watch: on smooth the Seale, And bended Dolphins play: part huge of bulk Wallowing unweildie, enormous in thir Gate Tempest the Ocean: there Leviathan Hugest of living Creatures, on the Deep Stretcht like a Promontorie sleeps or swimmes, And seems a moving Land, and at his Gilles Draws in, and at his Trunck spouts out a Sea. Mean while the tepid Caves, and Fens and shoares Thir Brood as numerous hatch, from the Egg that soon Bursting with kindly rupture forth disclos'd Thir callow young, but featherd soon and fledge They summ'd thir Penns, and soaring th' air sublime With clang despis'd the ground, under a cloud In prospect; there the Eagle and the Stork On Cliffs and Cedar tops thir Eyries build: Part loosly wing the Region, part more wise In common, rang'd in figure wedge thir way, Intelligent of seasons, and set forth Thir Aierie Caravan high over Sea's Flying, and over Lands with mutual wing Easing thir flight; so stears the prudent Crane Her annual Voiage, born on Windes; the Aire Floats, as they pass, fann'd with unnumber'd plumes: From Branch to Branch the smaller Birds with song Solac'd the Woods, and spred thir painted wings Till Ev'n, nor then the solemn Nightingal Ceas'd warbling, but all night tun'd her soft layes: Others on Silver Lakes and Rivers Bath'd Thir downie Brest; the Swan with Arched neck Between her white wings mantling proudly, Rowes Her state with Oarie feet: yet oft they quit The Dank, and rising on stiff Pennons, towre The mid Aereal Skie: Others on ground Walk'd firm; the crested Cock whose clarion sounds The silent hours, and th' other whose gay Traine Adorns him, colour'd with the Florid hue Of Rainbows and Starrie Eyes. The Waters thus With Fish replenisht, and the Aire with Fowle, Ev'ning and Morn solemniz'd the Fift day. The Sixt, and of Creation last arose With Eevning Harps and Mattin, when God said, Let th' Earth bring forth Fowle living in her kinde, Cattel and Creeping things, and Beast of the Earth, Each in their kinde. The Earth obey'd, and strait Op'ning her fertil Woomb teem'd at a Birth Innumerous living Creatures, perfet formes, Limb'd and full grown: out of the ground up-rose As from his Laire the wilde Beast where he wonns In Forrest wilde, in Thicket, Brake, or Den; Among the Trees in Pairs they rose, they walk'd: The Cattel in the Fields and Meddowes green: Those rare and solitarie, these in flocks Pasturing at once, and in broad Herds upsprung: The grassie Clods now Calv'd, now half appeer'd The Tawnie Lion, pawing to get free His hinder parts, then springs as broke from Bonds, And Rampant shakes his Brinded main; the Ounce, Rising, the crumbl'd Earth above them threw In Hillocks; the swift Stag from under ground Bore up his branching head: scarse from his mould BEHEMOTH biggest born of Earth upheav'd His vastness: Fleec't the Flocks and bleating rose, As Plants: ambiguous between Sea and Land The River Horse and scalie Crocodile. At once came forth whatever creeps the ground, Insect or Worme; those wav'd thir limber fans For wings, and smallest Lineaments exact In all the Liveries dect of Summers pride With spots of Gold and Purple, azure and green: These as a line thir long dimension drew, Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not all Minims of Nature; some of Serpent kinde Wondrous in length and corpulence involv'd Thir Snakie foulds, and added wings. First crept The Parsimonious Emmet, provident Of future, in small room large heart enclos'd, Pattern of just equalitie perhaps Hereafter, join'd in her popular Tribes Of Commonaltie: swarming next appeer'd The Femal Bee that feeds her Husband Drone Deliciously, and builds her waxen Cells With Honey stor'd: the rest are numberless, And thou thir Natures know'st, and gav'st them Names, Needlest to thee repeaed; nor unknown The Serpent suttl'st Beast of all the field, Of huge extent somtimes, with brazen Eyes And hairie Main terrific, though to thee Not noxious, but obedient at thy call. Now Heav'n in all her Glorie shon, and rowld Her motions, as the great first-Movers hand First wheeld thir course; Earth in her rich attire Consummate lovly smil'd; Aire, Water, Earth, By Fowl, Fish, Beast, was flown, was swum, was walkt Frequent; and of the Sixt day yet remain'd; There wanted yet the Master work, the end Of all yet don; a Creature who not prone And Brute as other Creatures, but endu'd With Sanctitie of Reason, might erect His Stature, and upright with Front serene Govern the rest, self-knowing, and from thence Magnanimous to correspond with Heav'n, But grateful to acknowledge whence his good Descends, thither with heart and voice and eyes Directed in Devotion, to adore And worship God Supream, who made him chief Of all his works: therefore the Omnipotent Eternal Father For where is not hee Present thus to his Son audibly spake. Let us make now Man in our image, Man In our similitude, and let them rule Beast of the Field, and over all the Earth, And every creeping thing that creeps the ground. This said, he formd thee, ADAM, thee O Man Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breath'd The breath of Life; in his own Image hee Created thee, in the Image of God Express, and thou becam'st a living Soul. Male he created thee, but thy consort Femal for Race; then bless'd Mankinde, and said, Be fruitful, multiplie, and fill the Earth, Subdue it, and throughout Dominion hold And every living thing that moves on the Earth. Wherever thus created, for no place Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou know'st He brought thee into this delicious Grove, This Garden, planted with the Trees of God, Delectable both to behold and taste; And freely all thir pleasant fruit for food Gave thee, all sorts are here that all th' Earth yeelds, Varietie without end; but of the Tree Which tasted works knowledge of Good and Evil, Thou mai'st not; in the day thou eat'st, thou di'st; Death is the penaltie impos'd, beware, And govern well thy appetite, least sin Surprise thee, and her black attendant Death. Here finish'd hee, and all that he had made View'd, and behold all was entirely good; So Ev'n and Morn accomplish'd the Sixt day: Yet not till the Creator from his work Desisting, though unwearied, up returnd Up to the Heav'n of Heav'ns his high abode, Thence to behold this new created World Th' addition of his Empire, how it shew'd In prospect from his Throne, how good, how faire, Answering his great Idea. Up he rode Followd with acclamation and the sound Symphonious of ten thousand Harpes that tun'd Angelic harmonies: the Earth, the Aire Resounded, thou remember'st, for thou heardst The Heav'ns and all the Constellations rung, The Planets in thir stations list'ning stood, While the bright Pomp ascended jubilant. Open, ye everlasting Gates, they sung, Open, ye Heav'ns, your living dores; let in The great Creator from his work returnd Magnificent, his Six days work, a World; Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deigne To visit oft the dwellings of just Men Delighted, and with frequent intercourse Thither will send his winged Messengers On errands of supernal Grace. So sung The glorious Train ascending: He through Heav'n, That open'd wide her blazing Portals, led To Gods Eternal house direct the way, A broad and ample rode, whose dust is Gold And pavement Starrs, as Starrs to thee appeer, Seen in the Galaxie, that Milkie way Which nightly as a circling Zone thou seest Pouderd with Starrs. And now on Earth the Seaventh Eev'ning arose in EDEN, for the Sun Was set, and twilight from the East came on, Forerunning Night; when at the holy mount Of Heav'ns high-seated top, th' Impereal Throne Of Godhead, fixt for ever firm and sure, The Filial Power arriv'd, and sate him down With his great Father for he also went Invisible, yet staid such priviledge Hath Omnipresence and the work ordain'd, Author and end of all things, and from work Now resting, bless'd and hallowd the Seav'nth day, As resting on that day from all his work, But not in silence holy kept; the Harp Had work and rested not, the solemn Pipe, And Dulcimer, all Organs of sweet stop, All sounds on Fret by String or Golden Wire Temper'd soft Tunings, intermixt with Voice Choral or Unison: of incense Clouds Fuming from Golden Censers hid the Mount. Creation and the Six dayes acts they sung, Great are thy works, JEHOVAH, infinite Thy power; what thought can measure thee or tongue Relate thee; greater now in thy return Then from the Giant Angels; thee that day Thy Thunders magnifi'd; but to create Is greater then created to destroy. Who can impair thee, mighty King, or bound Thy Empire? easily the proud attempt Of Spirits apostat and thir Counsels vaine Thou hast repeld, while impiously they thought Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw The number of thy worshippers. Who seekes To lessen thee, against his purpose serves To manifest the more thy might: his evil Thou usest, and from thence creat'st more good. Witness this new-made World, another Heav'n From Heaven Gate not farr, founded in view On the cleer HYALINE, the Glassie Sea; Of amplitude almost immense, with Starr's Numerous, and every Starr perhaps a World Of destind habitation; but thou know'st Thir seasons: among these the seat of men, Earth with her nether Ocean circumfus'd, Thir pleasant dwelling place. Thrice happie men, And sons of men, whom God hath thus advanc't, Created in his Image, there to dwell And worship him, and in reward to rule And multiply a Race of Worshippers Holy and just: thrice happie if they know Thir happiness, and persevere upright. So sung they, and the Empyrean rung, With HALLELUIAHS: Thus was Sabbath kept. And thy request think now fulfill'd, that ask'd How first this World and face of things began, And what before thy memorie was don From the beginning, that posteritie Informd by thee might know; if else thou seekst Aught, not surpassing human measure, say. To whom thus ADAM gratefully repli'd. What thanks sufficient, or what recompence Equal have I to render thee, Divine Hystorian, who thus largely hast allayd The thirst I had of knowledge, and voutsaf't This friendly condescention to relate Things else by me unsearchable, now heard VVith wonder, but delight, and, as is due, With glorie attributed to the high Creator; some thing yet of doubt remaines, VVhich onely thy solution can resolve. VVhen I behold this goodly Frame, this VVorld Of Heav'n and Earth consisting, and compute, Thir magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a graine, An Atom, with the Firmament compar'd And all her numberd Starrs, that seem to rowle Spaces incomprehensible for such Thir distance argues and thir swift return Diurnal meerly to officiate light Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot, One day and night; in all thir vast survey Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire, How Nature wise and frugal could commit Such disproportions, with superfluous hand So many nobler Bodies to create, Greater so manifold to this one use, For aught appeers, and on thir Orbs impose Such restless revolution day by day Repeated, while the sedentarie Earth, That better might with farr less compass move, Serv'd by more noble then her self, attaines Her end without least motion, and receaves, As Tribute such a sumless journey brought Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light; Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number failes. So spake our Sire, and by his count'nance seemd Entring on studious thoughts abstruse, which EVE Perceaving where she sat retir'd in sight, With lowliness Majestic from her seat, And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay, Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flours, To visit how they prosper'd, bud and bloom, Her Nurserie; they at her coming sprung And toucht by her fair tendance gladlier grew. Yet went she not, as not with such discourse Delighted, or not capable her eare Of what was high: such pleasure she reserv'd, ADAM relating, she sole Auditress; Her Husband the Relater she preferr'd Chose rather; hee, she knew would intermix Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip Not Words alone pleas'd her. O when meet now Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honour joyn'd? With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went; Not unattended, for on her as Queen A pomp of winning Graces waited still, And from about her shot Darts of desire Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight. And RAPHAEL now to ADAM's doubt propos'd Benevolent and facil thus repli'd. To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heav'n Is as the Book of God before thee set, Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learne This to attain, whether Heav'n move or Earth, Imports not, if thou reck'n right, the rest From Man or Angel the great Architect Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge His secrets to be scann'd by them who ought Rather admire; or if they list to try Conjecture, he his Fabric of the Heav'ns Hath left to thir disputes, perhaps to move His laughter at thir quaint Opinions wide Hereafter, when they come to model Heav'n And calculate the Starrs, how they will weild The mightie frame, how build, unbuild, contrive To save appeerances, how gird the Sphear With Centric and Eccentric scribl'd o're, Alreadie by thy reasoning this I guess, Who art to lead thy ofspring, and supposest That Bodies bright and greater should not serve The less not bright, nor Heav'n such journies run, Earth sitting still, when she alone receaves The benefit: consider first, that Great Or Bright inferrs not Excellence: the Earth Though, in comparison of Heav'n, so small, Nor glistering, may of solid good containe More plenty then the Sun that barren shines, Whose vertue on it self workes no effect, But in the fruitful Earth; there first receavd His beams, unactive else, thir vigor find. Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries Officious, but to thee Earths habitant. And for the Heav'ns wide Circuit, let it speak The Makers high magnificence, who built So spacious, and his Line stretcht out so farr; That Man may know he dwells not in his own; An Edifice too large for him to fill, Lodg'd in a small partition, and the rest Ordain'd for uses to his Lord best known. The swiftness of those Circles attribute, Though numberless, to his Omnipotence, That to corporeal substances could adde Speed almost Spiritual; mee thou thinkst not slow, Who since the Morning hour set out from Heav'n Where God resides, and ere mid-day arriv'd In EDEN, distance inexpressible By Numbers that have name. But this I urge, Admitting Motion in the Heav'ns, to shew Invalid that which thee to doubt it mov'd; Not that I so affirm, though so it seem To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth. God to remove his wayes from human sense, Plac'd Heav'n from Earth so farr, that earthly sight, If it presume, might erre in things too high, And no advantage gaine. What if the Sun Be Center to the World, and other Starrs By his attractive vertue and thir own Incited, dance about him various rounds? Thir wandring course now high, now low, then hid, Progressive, retrograde, or standing still, In six thou seest, and what if sev'nth to these The Planet Earth, so stedfast though she seem, Insensibly three different Motions move? Which else to several Sphears thou must ascribe, Mov'd contrarie with thwart obliquities, Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb suppos'd, Invisible else above all Starrs, the Wheele Of Day and Night; which needs not thy beleefe, If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day Travelling East, and with her part averse From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part Still luminous by his ray. What if that light Sent from her through the wide transpicuous aire, To the terrestrial Moon be as a Starr This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there, Feilds and Inhabitants: Her spots thou seest As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce Fruits in her soft'nd Soile, for some to eate Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps With thir attendant Moons thou wilt descrie Which two great Sexes animate the World, Stor'd in each Orb perhaps with some that live. For such vast room in Nature unpossest By living Soule, desert and desolate, Onely to shine, yet scarce to contribute Each Orb a glimps of Light, conveyd so farr Down to this habitable, which returnes Light back to them, is obvious to dispute. But whether thus these things, or whether not, Whether the Sun predominant in Heav'n Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun, Hee from the East his flaming rode begin, Or Shee from West her silent course advance With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps On her soft Axle, while she paces Eev'n, And bears thee soft with the smooth Air along, Sollicit not thy thoughts with matters hid, Leave them to God above, him serve and feare; Of other Creatures, as him pleases best, Wherever plac't, let him dispose: joy thou In what he gives to thee, this Paradise And thy faire EVE; Heav'n is for thee too high To know what passes there; be lowlie wise: Think onely what concernes thee and thy being; Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there Live, in what state, condition or degree, Contented that thus farr hath been reveal'd Not of Earth onely but of highest Heav'n. To whom thus ADAM cleerd of doubt, repli'd. How fully hast thou satisfi'd mee, pure Intelligence of Heav'n, Angel serene, And freed from intricacies, taught to live, The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which God hath bid dwell farr off all anxious cares, And not molest us, unless we our selves Seek them with wandring thoughts, and notions vaine. But apt the Mind or Fancie is to roave Uncheckt, and of her roaving is no end; Till warn'd, or by experience taught, she learne, That not to know at large of things remote From use, obscure and suttle, but to know That which before us lies in daily life, Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume, Or emptiness, or fond impertinence, And renders us in things that most concerne Unpractis'd, unprepar'd, and still to seek. Therefore from this high pitch let us descend A lower flight, and speak of things at hand Useful, whence haply mention may arise Of somthing not unseasonable to ask By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deign'd. Thee I have heard relating what was don Ere my remembrance: now hear mee relate My Storie, which perhaps thou hast not heard; And Day is yet not spent; till then thou seest How suttly to detaine thee I devise, Inviting thee to hear while I relate, Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply: For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heav'n, And sweeter thy discourse is to my eare Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst And hunger both, from labour, at the houre Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill, Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine Imbu'd, bring to thir sweetness no satietie. To whom thus RAPHAEL answer'd heav'nly meek. Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men, Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee Abundantly his gifts hath also pour'd, Inward and outward both, his image faire: Speaking or mute all comliness and grace Attends thee, and each word, each motion formes. Nor less think wee in Heav'n of thee on Earth Then of our fellow servant, and inquire Gladly into the wayes of God with Man: For God we see hath honour'd thee, and set On Man his equal Love: say therefore on; For I that Day was absent, as befell, Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure, Farr on excursion toward the Gates of Hell; Squar'd in full Legion such command we had To see that none thence issu'd forth a spie, Or enemie, while God was in his work, Least hee incenst at such eruption bold, Destruction with Creation might have mixt. Not that they durst without his leave attempt, But us he sends upon his high behests For state, as Sovran King, and to enure Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut The dismal Gates, and barricado'd strong; But long ere our approaching heard within Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song, Torment, and lowd lament, and furious rage. Glad we return'd up to the coasts of Light Ere Sabbath Eev'ning: so we had in charge. But thy relation now; for I attend, Pleas'd with thy words no less then thou with mine. So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire. For Man to tell how human Life began Is hard; for who himself beginning knew? Desire with thee still longer to converse Induc'd me. As new wak't from soundest sleep Soft on the flourie herb I found me laid In Balmie Sweat, which with his Beames the Sun Soon dri'd, and on the reaking moisture fed. Strait toward Heav'n my wondring Eyes I turnd, And gaz'd a while the ample Skie, till rais'd By quick instinctive motion up I sprung, As thitherward endevoring, and upright Stood on my feet; about me round I saw Hill, Dale, and shadie Woods, and sunnie Plaines, And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these, Creatures that livd, and movd, and walk'd, or flew, Birds on the branches warbling; all things smil'd, With fragrance and with joy my heart oreflow'd. My self I then perus'd, and Limb by Limb Survey'd, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran With supple joints, as lively vigour led: But who I was, or where, or from what cause, Knew not; to speak I tri'd, and forthwith spake, My Tongue obey'd and readily could name What e're I saw. Thou Sun, said I, faire Light, And thou enlight'nd Earth, so fresh and gay, And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell, Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here? Not of my self; by some great Maker then, In goodness and in power praeeminent; Tell me, how may I know him, how adore, From whom I have that thus I move and live, And feel that I am happier then I know. While thus I call'd, and stray'd I knew not whither, From where I first drew Aire, and first beheld This happie Light, when answer none return'd, On a green shadie Bank profuse of Flours Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep First found me, and with soft oppression seis'd My droused sense, untroubl'd, though I thought I then was passing to my former state Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve: When suddenly stood at my Head a dream, Whose inward apparition gently mov'd My Fancy to believe I yet had being, And livd: One came, methought, of shape Divine, And said, thy Mansion wants thee, ADAM, rise, First Man, of Men innumerable ordain'd First Father, call'd by thee I come thy Guide To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepar'd. So saying, by the hand he took me rais'd, And over Fields and Waters, as in Aire Smooth sliding without step, last led me up A woodie Mountain; whose high top was plaine, A Circuit wide, enclos'd, with goodliest Trees Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw Of Earth before scarse pleasant seemd. Each Tree Load'n with fairest Fruit, that hung to the Eye Tempting, stirr'd in me sudden appetite To pluck and eate; whereat I wak'd, and found Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream Had lively shadowd: Here had new begun My wandring, had not hee who was my Guide Up hither, from among the Trees appeer'd, Presence Divine. Rejoycing, but with aw In adoration at his feet I fell Submiss: he rear'd me, & Whom thou soughtst I am, Said mildely, Author of all this thou seest Above, or round about thee or beneath. This Paradise I give thee, count it thine To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eate: Of every Tree that in the Garden growes Eate freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth: But of the Tree whose operation brings Knowledg of good and ill, which I have set Remember what I warne thee, shun to taste, And shun the bitter consequence: for know, The day thou eat'st thereof, my sole command Transgrest, inevitably thou shalt dye; From that day mortal, and this happie State Shalt loose, expell'd from hence into a World Of woe and sorrow. Sternly he pronounc'd The rigid interdiction, which resounds Yet dreadful in mine eare, though in my choice Not to incur; but soon his cleer aspect Return'd and gratious purpose thus renew'd. Not onely these fair bounds, but all the Earth To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords Possess it, and all things that therein live, Or live in Sea, or Aire, Beast, Fish, and Fowle. In signe whereof each Bird and Beast behold After thir kindes; I bring them to receave From thee thir Names, and pay thee fealtie With low subjection; understand the same Of Fish within thir watry residence, Not hither summond, since they cannot change Thir Element to draw the thinner Aire. As thus he spake, each Bird and Beast behold Approaching two and two, These cowring low With blandishment, each Bird stoop'd on his wing. I nam'd them, as they pass'd, and understood Thir Nature, with such knowledg God endu'd My sudden apprehension: but in these I found not what me thought I wanted still; And to the Heav'nly vision thus presum'd. O by what Name, for thou above all these, Above mankinde, or aught then mankinde higher, Surpassest farr my naming, how may I Adore thee, Author of this Universe, And all this good to man, for whose well being So amply, and with hands so liberal Thou hast provided all things: but with mee I see not who partakes. In solitude What happiness, who can enjoy alone, Or all enjoying, what contentment find? Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright, As with a smile more bright'nd, thus repli'd. What call'st thou solitude, is not the Earth With various living creatures, and the Aire Replenisht, and all these at thy command To come and play before thee, know'st thou not Thir language and thir wayes, they also know, And reason not contemptibly; with these Find pastime, and beare rule; thy Realm is large. So spake the Universal Lord, and seem'd So ordering. I with leave of speech implor'd, And humble deprecation thus repli'd. Let not my words offend thee, Heav'nly Power, My Maker, be propitious while I speak. Hast thou not made me here thy substitute, And these inferiour farr beneath me set? Among unequals what societie Can sort, what harmonie or true delight? Which must be mutual, in proportion due Giv'n and receiv'd; but in disparitie The one intense, the other still remiss Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak Such as I seek, fit to participate All rational delight, wherein the brute Cannot be human consort; they rejoyce Each with thir kinde, Lion with Lioness; So fitly them in pairs thou hast combin'd; Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Fowle So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape; Wors then can Man with Beast, and least of all. Whereto th' Almighty answer'd, not displeas'd. A nice and suttle happiness I see Thou to thy self proposest, in the choice Of thy Associates, ADAM, and wilt taste No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitarie. What thinkst thou then of mee, and this my State, Seem I to thee sufficiently possest Of happiness, or not? who am alone From all Eternitie, for none I know Second to mee or like, equal much less. How have I then with whom to hold converse Save with the Creatures which I made, and those To me inferiour, infinite descents Beneath what other Creatures are to thee? He ceas'd, I lowly answer'd. To attaine The highth and depth of thy Eternal wayes All human thoughts come short, Supream of things; Thou in thy self art perfet, and in thee Is no deficience found; not so is Man, But in degree, the cause of his desire By conversation with his like to help, Or solace his defects. No need that thou Shouldst propagat, already infinite; And through all numbers absolute, though One; But Man by number is to manifest His single imperfection, and beget Like of his like, his Image multipli'd, In unitie defective, which requires Collateral love, and deerest amitie. Thou in thy secresie although alone, Best with thy self accompanied, seek'st not Social communication, yet so pleas'd, Canst raise thy Creature to what highth thou wilt Of Union or Communion, deifi'd; I by conversing cannot these erect From prone, nor in thir wayes complacence find. Thus I embold'nd spake, and freedom us'd Permissive, and acceptance found, which gain'd This answer from the gratious voice Divine. Thus farr to try thee, ADAM, I was pleas'd, And finde thee knowing not of Beasts alone, Which thou hast rightly nam'd, but of thy self, Expressing well the spirit within thee free, My Image, not imparted to the Brute, Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike, And be so minded still; I, ere thou spak'st, Knew it not good for Man to be alone, And no such companie as then thou saw'st Intended thee, for trial onely brought, To see how thou could'st judge of fit and meet: What next I bring shall please thee, be assur'd, Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self, Thy wish, exactly to thy hearts desire. Hee ended, or I heard no more, for now My earthly by his Heav'nly overpowerd, Which it had long stood under, streind to the highth In that celestial Colloquie sublime, As with an object that excels the sense, Dazl'd and spent, sunk down, and sought repair Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, call'd By Nature as in aide, and clos'd mine eyes. Mine eyes he clos'd, but op'n left the Cell Of Fancie my internal sight, by which Abstract as in a transe methought I saw, Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape Still glorious before whom awake I stood; Who stooping op'nd my left side, and took From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warme, And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound, But suddenly with flesh fill'd up & heal'd: The Rib he formd and fashond with his hands; Under his forming hands a Creature grew, Manlike, but different sex, so lovly faire, That what seemd fair in all the World, seemd now Mean, or in her summd up, in her containd And in her looks, which from that time infus'd Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before, And into all things from her Aire inspir'd The spirit of love and amorous delight. She disappeerd, and left me dark, I wak'd To find her, or for ever to deplore Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure: When out of hope, behold her, not farr off, Such as I saw her in my dream, adornd With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow To make her amiable: On she came, Led by her Heav'nly Maker, though unseen, And guided by his voice, nor uninformd Of nuptial Sanctitie and marriage Rites: Grace was in all her steps, Heav'n in her Eye, In every gesture dignitie and love. I overjoyd could not forbear aloud. This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfill'd Thy words, Creator bounteous and benigne, Giver of all things faire, but fairest this Of all thy gifts, nor enviest. I now see Extracted; for this cause he shall forgoe Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere; And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soule. She heard me thus, and though divinely brought, Her vertue and the conscience of her worth, That would be woo'd, and not unsought be won, Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retir'd, The more desirable, or to say all, Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought, Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turn'd; I follow'd her, she what was Honour knew, And with obsequious Majestie approv'd My pleaded reason. To the Nuptial Bowre I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heav'n, And happie Constellations on that houre Shed thir selectest influence; the Earth Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill; Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires Whisper'd it to the Woods, and from thir wings Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicie Shrub, Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Eevning Starr On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp. Thus I have told thee all my State, and brought My Storie to the sum of earthly bliss Which I enjoy, and must confess to find In all things else delight indeed, but such As us'd or not, works in the mind no change, Nor vehement desire, these delicacies I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, & Flours, Walks, and the melodie of Birds; but here Farr otherwise, transported I behold, Transported touch; here passion first I felt, Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else Superiour and unmov'd, here onely weake Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance. Or Nature faild in mee, and left some part Not proof enough such Object to sustain, Or from my side subducting, took perhaps More then enough; at least on her bestow'd Too much of Ornament, in outward shew Elaborate, of inward less exact. For well I understand in the prime end Of Nature her th' inferiour, in the mind And inward Faculties, which most excell, In outward also her resembling less His Image who made both, and less expressing The character of that Dominion giv'n O're other Creatures; yet when I approach Her loveliness, so absolute she seems And in her self compleat, so well to know Her own, that what she wills to do or say, Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best; All higher knowledge in her presence falls Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her Looses discount'nanc't, and like folly shewes; Authoritie and Reason on her waite, As one intended first, not after made Occasionally; and to consummate all, Greatness of mind and nobleness thir seat Build in her loveliest, and create an awe About her, as a guard Angelic plac't. To whom the Angel with contracted brow. Accuse not Nature, she hath don her part; Do thou but thine, and be not diffident Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou Dismiss not her, when most thou needst her nigh, By attributing overmuch to things Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav'st. For what admir'st thou, what transports thee so, An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love, Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self; Then value: Oft times nothing profits more Then self-esteem, grounded on just and right Well manag'd; of that skill the more thou know'st, The more she will acknowledge thee her Head, And to realities yeild all her shows; Made so adorn for thy delight the more, So awful, that with honour thou maist love Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise. But if the sense of touch whereby mankind Is propagated seem such dear delight Beyond all other, think the same voutsaf't To Cattel and each Beast; which would not be To them made common & divulg'd, if aught Therein enjoy'd were worthy to subdue The Soule of Man, or passion in him move. What higher in her societie thou findst Attractive, human, rational, love still; In loving thou dost well, in passion not, Wherein true Love consists not; love refines The thoughts, and heart enlarges, hath his seat In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale By which to heav'nly Love thou maist ascend, Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found. To whom thus half abash't ADAM repli'd. Neither her out-side formd so fair, nor aught In procreation common to all kindes Though higher of the genial Bed by far, And with mysterious reverence I deem So much delights me, as those graceful acts, Those thousand decencies that daily flow From all her words and actions, mixt with Love And sweet compliance, which declare unfeign'd Union of Mind, or in us both one Soule; Harmonie to behold in wedded pair More grateful then harmonious sound to the eare. Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose What inward thence I feel, not therefore foild, Who meet with various objects, from the sense Variously representing; yet still free Approve the best, and follow what I approve. To love thou blam'st me not, for love thou saist Leads up to Heav'n, is both the way and guide; Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask; Love not the heav'nly Spirits, and how thir Love Express they, by looks onely, or do they mix Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? To whom the Angel with a smile that glow'd Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue, Answer'd. Let it suffice thee that thou know'st Us happie, and without Love no happiness. Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy'st And pure thou wert created we enjoy In eminence, and obstacle find none Of membrane, joynt, or limb, exclusive barrs: Easier then Air with Air, if Spirits embrace, Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure Desiring; nor restrain'd conveyance need As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul. But I can now no more; the parting Sun Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles HESPEREAN sets, my Signal to depart. Be strong, live happie, and love, but first of all Him whom to love is to obey, and keep His great command; take heed least Passion sway Thy Judgement to do aught, which else free Will Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons The weal or woe in thee is plac't; beware. I in thy persevering shall rejoyce, And all the Blest: stand fast; to stand or fall Free in thine own Arbitrement it lies. Perfet within, no outward aid require; And all temptation to transgress repel. So saying, he arose; whom ADAM thus Follow'd with benediction. Since to part, Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger, Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore. Gentle to me and affable hath been Thy condescension, and shall be honour'd ever With grateful Memorie: thou to mankind Be good and friendly still, and oft return. So parted they, the Angel up to Heav'n From the thick shade, and ADAM to his Bowre. No more of talk where God or Angel Guest With Man, as with his Friend, familiar us'd To sit indulgent, and with him partake Rural repast, permitting him the while Venial discourse unblam'd: I now must change Those Notes to Tragic; foul distrust, and breach Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt And disobedience: On the part of Heav'n Now alienated, distance and distaste, Anger and just rebuke, and judgement giv'n, That brought into this World a world of woe, Sinne and her shadow Death, and Miserie Deaths Harbinger: Sad task, yet argument Not less but more Heroic then the wrauth Of stern ACHILLES on his Foe pursu'd Thrice Fugitive about TROY Wall; or rage Of TURNUS for LAVINIA disespous'd, Or NEPTUN'S ire or JUNO'S, that so long Perplex'd the GREEK and CYTHEREA'S Son; If answerable style I can obtaine Of my Celestial Patroness, who deignes Her nightly visitation unimplor'd, And dictates to me slumbring, or inspires Easie my unpremeditated Verse: Since first this subject for Heroic Song Pleas'd me long choosing, and beginning late; Not sedulous by Nature to indite Warrs, hitherto the onely Argument Heroic deem'd, chief maistrie to dissect With long and tedious havoc fabl'd Knights In Battels feign'd; the better fortitude Unsung; or to describe Races and Games, Or tilting Furniture, emblazon'd Shields, Impreses quaint, Caparisons and Steeds; Bases and tinsel Trappings, gorgious Knights At Joust and Torneament; then marshal'd Feast Serv'd up in Hall with Sewers, and Seneshals; The skill of Artifice or Office mean, Not that which justly gives Heroic name To Person or to Poem. Mee of these Nor skilld nor studious, higher Argument Remaines, sufficient of it self to raise That name, unless an age too late, or cold Climat, or Years damp my intended wing Deprest, and much they may, if all be mine, Not Hers who brings it nightly to my Ear. The Sun was sunk, and after him the Starr Of HESPERUS, whose Office is to bring Twilight upon the Earth, short Arbiter Twixt Day and Night, and now from end to end Nights Hemisphere had veild the Horizon round: When SATAN who late fled before the threats Of GABRIEL out of EDEN, now improv'd In meditated fraud and malice, bent On mans destruction, maugre what might hap Of heavier on himself, fearless return'd. By Night he fled, and at Midnight return'd From compassing the Earth, cautious of day, Since URIEL Regent of the Sun descri'd His entrance, and forewarnd the Cherubim That kept thir watch; thence full of anguish driv'n, The space of seven continu'd Nights he rode With darkness, thrice the Equinoctial Line He circl'd, four times cross'd the Carr of Night From Pole to Pole, traversing each Colure; On the eighth return'd, and on the Coast averse From entrance or Cherubic Watch, by stealth Found unsuspected way. There was a place, Now not, though Sin, not Time, first wraught the change, Where TIGRIS at the foot of Paradise Into a Gulf shot under ground, till part In with the River sunk, and with it rose Satan involv'd in rising Mist, then sought Where to lie hid; Sea he had searcht and Land From EDEN over PONTUS, and the Poole MAEOTIS, up beyond the River OB; Downward as farr Antartic; and in length West from ORANTES to the Ocean barr'd At DARIEN, thence to the Land where flowes GANGES and INDUS: thus the Orb he roam'd With narrow search; and with inspection deep Consider'd every Creature, which of all Most opportune might serve his Wiles, and found The Serpent suttlest Beast of all the Field. Him after long debate, irresolute Of thoughts revolv'd, his final sentence chose Fit Vessel, fittest Imp of fraud, in whom To enter, and his dark suggestions hide From sharpest sight: for in the wilie Snake, Whatever sleights none would suspicious mark, As from his wit and native suttletie Proceeding, which in other Beasts observ'd Doubt might beget of Diabolic pow'r Active within beyond the sense of brute. Thus he resolv'd, but first from inward griefe His bursting passion into plaints thus pour'd: O Earth, how like to Heav'n, if not preferrd More justly, Seat worthier of Gods, as built With second thoughts, reforming what was old! For what God after better worse would build? Terrestrial Heav'n, danc't round by other Heav'ns That shine, yet bear thir bright officious Lamps, Light above Light, for thee alone, as seems, In thee concentring all thir precious beams Of sacred influence: As God in Heav'n Is Center, yet extends to all, so thou Centring receav'st from all those Orbs; in thee, Not in themselves, all thir known vertue appeers Productive in Herb, Plant, and nobler birth Of Creatures animate with gradual life Of Growth, Sense, Reason, all summ'd up in Man. With what delight could I have walkt thee round If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange Now Land, now Sea, & Shores with Forrest crownd, Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these Find place or refuge; and the more I see Pleasures about me, so much more I feel Torment within me, as from the hateful siege Of contraries; all good to me becomes Bane, and in Heav'n much worse would be my state. But neither here seek I, no nor in Heav'n To dwell, unless by maistring Heav'ns Supreame; Nor hope to be my self less miserable By what I seek, but others to make such As I though thereby worse to me redound: For onely in destroying I finde ease To my relentless thoughts; and him destroyd, Or won to what may work his utter loss, For whom all this was made, all this will soon Follow, as to him linkt in weal or woe, In wo then; that destruction wide may range: To mee shall be the glorie sole among The infernal Powers, in one day to have marr'd What he ALMIGHTIE styl'd, six Nights and Days Continu'd making, and who knows how long Before had bin contriving, though perhaps Not longer then since I in one Night freed From servitude inglorious welnigh half Th' Angelic Name, and thinner left the throng Of his adorers: hee to be aveng'd, And to repaire his numbers thus impair'd, Whether such vertue spent of old now faild More Angels to Create, if they at least Are his Created or to spite us more, Determin'd to advance into our room A Creature form'd of Earth, and him endow, Exalted from so base original, With Heav'nly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed He effected; Man he made, and for him built Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat, Him Lord pronounc'd, and, O indignitie! Subjected to his service Angel wings, And flaming Ministers to watch and tend Thir earthlie Charge: Of these the vigilance I dread, and to elude, thus wrapt in mist Of midnight vapor glide obscure, and prie In every Bush and Brake, where hap may finde The Serpent sleeping, in whose mazie foulds To hide me, and the dark intent I bring. O foul descent! that I who erst contended With Gods to sit the highest, am now constraind Into a Beast, and mixt with bestial slime, This essence to incarnate and imbrute, That to the hight of Deitie aspir'd; But what will not Ambition and Revenge Descend to? who aspires must down as low As high he soard, obnoxious first or last To basest things. Revenge, at first though sweet, Bitter ere long back on it self recoiles; Let it; I reck not, so it light well aim'd, Since higher I fall short, on him who next Provokes my envie, this new Favorite Of Heav'n, this Man of Clay, Son of despite, Whom us the more to spite his Maker rais'd From dust: spite then with spite is best repaid. So saying, through each Thicket Danck or Drie, Like a black mist low creeping, he held on His midnight search, where soonest he might finde The Serpent: him fast sleeping soon he found In Labyrinth of many a round self-rowl'd, His head the midst, well stor'd with suttle wiles: Not yet in horrid Shade or dismal Den, Not nocent yet, but on the grassie Herbe Fearless unfeard he slept: in at his Mouth The Devil enterd, and his brutal sense, In heart or head, possessing soon inspir'd With act intelligential; but his sleep Disturbd not, waiting close th' approach of Morn. Now whenas sacred Light began to dawne In EDEN on the humid Flours, that breathd Thir morning Incense, when all things that breath, From th' Earths great Altar send up silent praise To the Creator, and his Nostrils fill With gratefull Smell, forth came the human pair And joynd thir vocal Worship to the Quire Of Creatures wanting voice, that done, partake The season, prime for sweetest Sents and Aires: Then commune how that day they best may ply Thir growing work: for much thir work outgrew The hands dispatch of two Gardning so wide. And EVE first to her Husband thus began. ADAM, well may we labour still to dress This Garden, still to tend Plant, Herb and Flour. Our pleasant task enjoyn'd, but till more hands Aid us, the work under our labour grows, Luxurious by restraint; what we by day Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind, One night or two with wanton growth derides Tending to wilde. Thou therefore now advise Or hear what to my mind first thoughts present, Let us divide our labours, thou where choice Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind The Woodbine round this Arbour, or direct The clasping Ivie where to climb, while I In yonder Spring of Roses intermixt With Myrtle, find what to redress till Noon: For while so near each other thus all day Our task we choose, what wonder if no near Looks intervene and smiles, or object new Casual discourse draw on, which intermits Our dayes work brought to little, though begun Early, and th' hour of Supper comes unearn'd. To whom mild answer ADAM thus return'd. Sole EVE, Associate sole, to me beyond Compare above all living Creatures deare, Well hast thou motion'd, wel thy thoughts imployd How we might best fulfill the work which here God hath assign'd us, nor of me shalt pass Unprais'd: for nothing lovelier can be found In woman, then to studie houshold good, And good workes in her Husband to promote. Yet not so strictly hath our Lord impos'd Labour, as to debarr us when we need Refreshment, whether food, or talk between, Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse Of looks and smiles, for smiles from Reason flow, To brute deni'd, and are of Love the food, Love not the lowest end of human life. For not to irksom toile, but to delight He made us, and delight to Reason joyn'd. These paths and Bowers doubt not but our joynt Will keep from Wilderness with ease, as wide As we need walk, till younger hands ere long Assist us: But if much converse perhaps Thee satiate, to short absence I could yeild. For solitude somtimes is best societie, And short retirement urges sweet returne. But other doubt possesses me, least harm Befall thee sever'd from me; for thou knowst What hath bin warn'd us, what malicious Foe Envying our happiness, and of his own Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame By sly assault; and somwhere nigh at hand Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find His wish and best advantage, us asunder, Hopeless to circumvent us joynd, where each To other speedie aide might lend at need; Whether his first design be to withdraw Our fealtie from God, or to disturb Conjugal Love, then which perhaps no bliss Enjoy'd by us excites his envie more; Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side That gave thee being, stil shades thee and protects. The Wife, where danger or dishonour lurks, Safest and seemliest by her Husband staies, Who guards her, or with her the worst endures. To whom the Virgin Majestie of EVE, As one who loves, and some unkindness meets, With sweet austeer composure thus reply'd. Ofspring of Heav'n and Earth, and all Earths Lord, That such an enemie we have, who seeks Our ruin, both by thee informd I learne, And from the parting Angel over-heard As in a shadie nook I stood behind, Just then returnd at shut of Evening Flours. But that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt To God or thee, because we have a foe May tempt it, I expected not to hear. His violence thou fearst not, being such, As wee, not capable of death or paine, Can either not receave, or can repell. His fraud is then thy fear, which plain inferrs Thy equal fear that my firm Faith and Love Can by his fraud be shak'n or seduc't; Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy Brest, ADAM, misthought of her to thee so dear? To whom with healing words ADAM reply'd. Daughter of God and Man, immortal EVE, For such thou art, from sin and blame entire: Not diffident of thee do I dissuade Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid Th' attempt it self, intended by our Foe. For hee who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses The tempted with dishonour foul, suppos'd Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff Against temptation: thou thy self with scorne And anger wouldst resent the offer'd wrong, Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then, If such affront I labour to avert From thee alone, which on us both at once The Enemie, though bold, will hardly dare, Or daring, first on mee th' assault shall light. Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn; Suttle he needs must be, who could seduce Angels, nor think superfluous others aid. I from the influence of thy looks receave Access in every Vertue, in thy sight More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on, Shame to be overcome or over-reacht Would utmost vigor raise, and rais'd unite. Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel When I am present, and thy trial choose With me, best witness of thy Vertue tri'd. So spake domestick ADAM in his care And Matrimonial Love, but EVE, who thought Less attributed to her Faith sincere, Thus her reply with accent sweet renewd. If this be our condition, thus to dwell In narrow circuit strait'nd by a Foe, Suttle or violent, we not endu'd Single with like defence, wherever met, How are we happie, still in fear of harm? But harm precedes not sin: onely our Foe Tempting affronts us with his foul esteem Of our integritie: his foul esteeme Sticks no dishonor on our Front, but turns Foul on himself; then wherfore shund or feard By us? who rather double honour gaine From his surmise prov'd false, finde peace within, Favour from Heav'n, our witness from th' event. And what is Faith, Love, Vertue unassaid Alone, without exterior help sustaind? Let us not then suspect our happie State Left so imperfet by the Maker wise, As not secure to single or combin'd. Fraile is our happiness, if this be so, And EDEN were no EDEN thus expos'd. To whom thus ADAM fervently repli'd. O Woman, best are all things as the will Of God ordaind them, his creating hand Nothing imperfet or deficient left Of all that he Created, much less Man, Or ought that might his happie State secure, Secure from outward force; within himself The danger lies, yet lies within his power: Against his will he can receave no harme. But God left free the Will, for what obeyes Reason, is free, and Reason he made right, But bid her well beware, and still erect, Least by some faire appeering good surpris'd She dictate false, and missinforme the Will To do what God expresly hath forbid. Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoynes, That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me. Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve, Since Reason not impossibly may meet Some specious object by the Foe subornd, And fall into deception unaware, Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warnd. Seek not temptation then, which to avoide Were better, and most likelie if from mee Thou sever not; Trial will come unsought. Wouldst thou approve thy constancie, approve First thy obedience; th' other who can know, Not seeing thee attempted, who attest? But if thou think, trial unsought may finde Us both securer then thus warnd thou seemst, Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more; Go in thy native innocence, relie On what thou hast of vertue, summon all, For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine. So spake the Patriarch of Mankinde, but EVE Persisted, yet submiss, though last, repli'd. With thy permission then, and thus forewarnd Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words Touchd onely, that our trial, when least sought, May finde us both perhaps farr less prepar'd, The willinger I goe, nor much expect A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek; So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse. Thus saying, from her Husbands hand her hand Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light OREAD or DRYAD, or of DELIA's Traine, Betook her to the Groves, but DELIA's self In gate surpass'd and Goddess-like deport, Though not as shee with Bow and Quiver armd, But with such Gardning Tools as Are yet rude, Guiltless of fire had formd, or Angels brought, To PALES, or POMONA, thus adornd, Likest she seemd, POMONA when she fled VERTUMNUS, or to CERES in her Prime, Yet Virgin of PROSERPINA from JOVE. Her long with ardent look his EYE pursu'd Delighted, but desiring more her stay. Oft he to her his charge of quick returne, Repeated, shee to him as oft engag'd To be returnd by Noon amid the Bowre, And all things in best order to invite Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose. O much deceav'd, much failing, hapless EVE, Of thy presum'd return! event perverse! Thou never from that houre in Paradise Foundst either sweet repast, or found repose; Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades Waited with hellish rancor imminent To intercept thy way, or send thee back For now, and since first break of dawne the Fiend, Meer Serpent in appearance, forth was come, And on his Quest, where likeliest he might finde The onely two of Mankinde, but in them The whole included Race, his purposd prey. In Bowre and Field he sought, where any tuft Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay, Thir tendance or Plantation for delight, By Fountain or by shadie Rivulet He sought them both, but wish'd his hap might find EVE separate, he wish'd, but not with hope Of what so seldom chanc'd, when to his wish, Beyond his hope, EVE separate he spies, Veild in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood, Half spi'd, so thick the Roses bushing round About her glowd, oft stooping to support Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold, Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies Gently with Mirtle band, mindless the while, Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour, From her best prop so farr, and storn so nigh. Neererhe drew, and many a walk travers'd Of stateliest Covert, Cedar, Pine, or Palme, Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen Among thick-wov'n Arborets and Flours Imborderd on each Bank, the hand of EVE: Spot more delicious then those Gardens feign'd Or of reviv'd ADONIS, or renownd ALCINOUS, host of old LAERTES Son, Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King Much hee the Place admir'd, the Person more. As one who long in populous City pent, Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy the Aire, Forth issuing on a Summers Morn, to breathe Among the pleasant Villages and Farmes Adjoynd, from each thing met conceaves delight, The smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine, Or Dairie, each rural sight, each rural sound; If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass, What pleasing seemd, for her now pleases more, She most, and in her look summs all Delight. Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold This Flourie Plat, the sweet recess of EVE Thus earlie, thus alone; her Heav'nly forme Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine, Her graceful Innocence, her every Aire Of gesture or lest action overawd His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereav'd His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought: That space the Evil one abstracted stood From his own evil, and for the time remaind Stupidly good, of enmitie disarm'd, Of guile, of hate, of envie, of revenge; But the hot Hell that alwayes in him burnes, Though in mid Heav'n, soon ended his delight, And tortures him now more, the more he sees Of pleasure not for him ordain'd: then soon Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites. Thoughts, whither have he led me, with what sweet Compulsion thus transported to forget What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy, Save what is in destroying, other joy To me is lost. Then let me not let pass Occasion which now smiles, behold alone The Woman, opportune to all attempts, Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh, Whose higher intellectual more I shun, And strength, of courage hautie, and of limb Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould, Foe not informidable, exempt from wound, I not; so much hath Hell debas'd, and paine Infeebl'd me, to what I was in Heav'n. Shee fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods, Not terrible, though terrour be in Love And beautie, not approacht by stronger hate, Hate stronger, under shew of Love well feign'd, The way which to her ruin now I tend. So spake the Enemie of Mankind, enclos'd In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward EVE Address'd his way, not with indented wave, Prone on the ground, as since, but on his reare, Circular base of rising foulds, that tour'd Fould above fould a surging Maze, his Head Crested aloft, and Carbuncle his Eyes; With burnisht Neck of verdant Gold, erect Amidst his circling Spires, that on the grass Floted redundant: pleasing was his shape, And lovely, never since of Serpent kind Lovelier, not those that in ILLYRIA chang'd HERMIONE and CADMUS, or the God In EPIDAURUS; nor to which transformd Hee with OLYMPIAS, this with her who bore SCIPIO the highth of ROME. With tract oblique At first, as one who sought access, but feard To interrupt, side-long he works his way. As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind Veres oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her Saile; So varied hee, and of his tortuous Traine Curld many a wanton wreath in sight of EVE, To lure her Eye; shee busied heard the sound Of rusling Leaves, but minded not, as us'd To such disport before her through the Field, From every Beast, more duteous at her call, Then at CIRCEAN call the Herd disguis'd. Hee boulder now, uncall'd before her stood; But as in gaze admiring: Oft he bowd His turret Crest, and sleek enamel'd Neck, Fawning, and lick'd the ground whereon she trod. The Eye of EVE to mark his play; he glad Of her attention gaind, with Serpent Tongue Organic, or impulse of vocal Air, His fraudulent temptation thus began. Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps Thou canst, who art sole Wonder, much less arm Thy looks, the Heav'n of mildness, with disdain, Displeas'd that I approach thee thus, and gaze Insatiate, I thus single; nor have feard Thy awful brow, more awful thus retir'd. Fairest resemblance of thy Maker faire, Thee all living things gaze on, all things thine By gift, and thy Celestial Beautie adore With ravishment beheld, there best beheld Where universally admir'd; but here In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among, Beholders rude, and shallow to discerne Half what in thee is fair, one man except, Who sees thee? and what is one? who shouldst be seen A Goddess among Gods, ador'd and serv'd By Angels numberless, thy daily Train. So gloz'd the Tempter, and his Proem tun'd; Into the Heart of EVE his words made way, Though at the voice much marveling; at length Not unamaz'd she thus in answer spake. What may this mean? Language of Man pronounc't By Tongue of Brute, and human sense exprest? The first at lest of these I thought deni'd To Beasts, whom God on their Creation-Day Created mute to all articulat sound; The latter I demurre, for in thir looks Much reason, and in thir actions oft appeers. Thee, Serpent, suttlest beast of all the field I knew, but not with human voice endu'd; Redouble then this miracle, and say, How cam'st thou speakable of mute, and how To me so friendly grown above the rest Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight? Say, for such wonder claims attention due. To whom the guileful Tempter thus reply'd. Empress of this fair World, resplendent EVE, Easie to mee it is to tell thee all What thou commandst, and right thou shouldst be obeyd: I was at first as other Beasts that graze The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low, As was my food, nor aught but food discern'd Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high: Till on a day roaving the field, I chanc'd A goodly Tree farr distant to behold Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixt, Ruddie and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze; When from the boughes a savorie odour blow'n, Grateful to appetite, more pleas'd my sense Then smell of sweetest Fenel, or the Teats Of Ewe or Goat dropping with Milk at Eevn, Unsuckt of Lamb or Kid, that tend thir play. To satisfie the sharp desire I had Of tasting those fair Apples, I resolv'd Not to deferr; hunger and thirst at once, Powerful perswaders, quick'nd at the scent Of that alluring fruit, urg'd me so keene. About the Mossie Trunk I wound me soon, For high from ground the branches would require Thy utmost reach or ADAMS: Round the Tree All other Beasts that saw, with like desire Longing and envying stood, but could not reach. Amid the Tree now got, where plentie hung Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill I spar'd not, for such pleasure till that hour At Feed or Fountain never had I found. Sated at length, ere long I might perceave Strange alteration in me, to degree Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech Wanted not long, though to this shape retaind. Thenceforth to Speculations high or deep I turnd my thoughts, and with capacious mind Considerd all things visible in Heav'n, Or Earth, or Middle, all things fair and good; But all that fair and good in thy Divine Semblance, and in thy Beauties heav'nly Ray United I beheld; no Fair to thine Equivalent or second, which compel'd Mee thus, though importune perhaps, to come And gaze, and worship thee of right declar'd Sovran of Creatures, universal Dame. So talk'd the spirited sly Snake; and EVE Yet more amaz'd unwarie thus reply'd. Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt The vertue of that Fruit, in thee first prov'd: But say, where grows the Tree, from hence how far? For many are the Trees of God that grow In Paradise, and various, yet unknown To us, in such abundance lies our choice, As leaves a greater store of Fruit untoucht, Still hanging incorruptible, till men Grow up to thir provision, and more hands Help to disburden Nature of her Bearth. To whom the wilie Adder, blithe and glad. Empress, the way is readie, and not long, Fast by a Fountain, one small Thicket past Of blowing Myrrh and Balme; if thou accept My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon. Lead then, said EVE. Hee leading swiftly rowld In tangles, and make intricate seem strait, To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy Bright'ns his Crest, as when a wandring Fire Compact of unctuous vapor, which the Night Condenses, and the cold invirons round, Kindl'd through agitation to a Flame, Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends, Hovering and blazing with delusive Light, Misleads th' amaz'd Night-wanderer from his way To Boggs and Mires, & oft through Pond or Poole, There swallow'd up and lost, from succour farr. So glister'd the dire Snake and into fraud Led EVE our credulous Mother, to the Tree Of prohibition, root of all our woe; Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake. Serpent, we might have spar'd our coming hither, Fruitless to me, though Fruit be here to excess, The credit of whose vertue rest with thee, Wondrous indeed, if cause of such effects. But of this Tree we may not taste nor touch; God so commanded, and left that Command Sole Daughter of his voice; the rest, we live Law to our selves, our Reason is our Law. To whom the Tempter guilefully repli'd. Indeed? hath God then said that of the Fruit Of all these Garden Trees ye shall not eate, Yet Lords declar'd of all in Earth or Aire? To whom thus EVE yet sinless. Of the Fruit Of each Tree in the Garden we may eate, But of the Fruit of this fair Tree amidst The Garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eate Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, least ye die. She scarse had said, though brief, when now more bold The Tempter, but with shew of Zeale and Love To Man, and indignation at his wrong, New part puts on, and as to passion mov'd, Fluctuats disturbd, yet comely, and in act Rais'd, as of som great matter to begin. As when of old som Orator renound In ATHENS or free ROME, where Eloquence Flourishd, since mute, to som great cause addrest, Stood in himself collected, while each part, Motion, each act won audience ere the tongue, Somtimes in highth began, as no delay Of Preface brooking through his Zeal of Right. So standing, moving, or to highth upgrown The Tempter all impassiond thus began. O Sacred, Wise, and Wisdom-giving Plant, Mother of Science, Now I feel thy Power Within me cleere, not onely to discerne Things in thir Causes, but to trace the wayes Of highest Agents, deemd however wise. Queen of this Universe, doe not believe Those rigid threats of Death; ye shall not Die: How should ye? by the Fruit? it gives you Life To Knowledge? By the Threatner, look on mee, Mee who have touch'd and tasted, yet both live, And life more perfet have attaind then Fate Meant mee, by ventring higher then my Lot. Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast Is open? or will God incense his ire For such a pretty Trespass, and not praise Rather your dauntless vertue, whom the pain Of Death denounc't, whatever thing Death be, Deterrd not from atchieving what might leade To happier life, knowledge of Good and Evil; Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil Be real, why not known, since easier shunnd? God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just; Not just, not God; not feard then, nor obeid: Your feare it self of Death removes the feare. Why then was this forbid? Why but to awe, Why but to keep ye low and ignorant, His worshippers; he knows that in the day Ye Eate thereof, your Eyes that seem so cleere, Yet are but dim, shall perfetly be then Op'nd and cleerd, and ye shall be as Gods, Knowing both Good and Evil as they know. That ye should be as Gods, since I as Man, Internal Man, is but proportion meet, I of brute human, yee of human Gods. So ye shalt die perhaps, by putting off Human, to put on Gods, death to be wisht, Though threat'nd, which no worse then this can bring And what are Gods that Man may not become As they, participating God-like food? The Gods are first, and that advantage use On our belief, that all from them proceeds, I question it, for this fair Earth I see, Warm'd by the Sun, producing every kind, Them nothing: If they all things, who enclos'd Knowledge of Good and Evil in this Tree, That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies Th' offence, that Man should thus attain to know? What can your knowledge hurt him, or this Tree Impart against his will if all be his? Or is it envie, and can envie dwell In heav'nly brests? these, these and many more Causes import your need of this fair Fruit. Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste. He ended, and his words replete with guile Into her heart too easie entrance won: Fixt on the Fruit she gaz'd, which to behold Might tempt alone, and in her ears the sound Yet rung of his perswasive words, impregn'd With Reason, to her seeming, and with Truth; Meanwhile the hour of Noon drew on, and wak'd An eager appetite, rais'd by the smell So savorie of that Fruit, which with desire, Inclinable now grown to touch or taste, Sollicited her longing eye; yet first Pausing a while, thus to her self she mus'd. Great are thy Vertues, doubtless, best of Fruits, Though kept from Man, & worthy to be admir'd, Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay Gave elocution to the mute, and taught The Tongue not made for Speech to speak thy praise: Thy praise hee also who forbids thy use, Conceales not from us, naming thee the Tree Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil; Forbids us then to taste, but his forbidding Commends thee more, while it inferrs the good By thee communicated, and our want: For good unknown, sure is not had, or had And yet unknown, is as not had at all. In plain then, what forbids he but to know, Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise? Such prohibitions binde not. But if Death Bind us with after-bands, what profits then Our inward freedom? In the day we eate Of this fair Fruit, our doom is, we shall die. How dies the Serpent? hee hath eat'n and lives, And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discernes, Irrational till then. For us alone Was death invented? or to us deni'd This intellectual food, for beasts reserv'd? For Beasts it seems: yet that one Beast which first Hath tasted, envies not, but brings with joy The good befall'n him, Author unsuspect, Friendly to man, farr from deceit or guile. What fear I then, rather what know to feare Under this ignorance of Good and Evil, Here grows the Cure of all, this Fruit Divine, Fair to the Eye, inviting to the Taste, Of vertue to make wise: what hinders then To reach, and feed at once both Bodie and Mind? So saying, her rash hand in evil hour Forth reaching to the Fruit, she pluck'd, she eat: Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat Sighing through all her Works gave signs of woe, That all was lost. Back to the Thicket slunk The guiltie Serpent, and well might, for EVE Intent now wholly on her taste, naught else Regarded, such delight till then, as seemd, In Fruit she never tasted, whether true Or fansied so, through expectation high Of knowledg, nor was God-head from her thought. Greedily she ingorg'd without restraint, And knew not eating Death: Satiate at length, And hight'nd as with Wine, jocond and boon, Thus to her self she pleasingly began. O Sovran, vertuous, precious of all Trees In Paradise, of operation blest To Sapience, hitherto obscur'd, infam'd, And thy fair Fruit let hang, as to no end Created; but henceforth my early care, Not without Song, each Morning, and due praise Shall tend thee, and the fertil burden ease Of thy full branches offer'd free to all; Till dieted by thee I grow mature In knowledge, as the Gods who all things know; Though others envie what they cannot give; For had the gift bin theirs, it had not here Thus grown. Experience, next to thee I owe, Best guide; not following thee, I had remaind In ignorance, thou op'nst Wisdoms way, And giv'st access, though secret she retire. And I perhaps am secret; Heav'n is high, High and remote to see from thence distinct Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps May have diverted from continual watch Our great Forbidder, safe with all his Spies About him. But to ADAM in what sort Shall I appeer? shall I to him make known As yet my change, and give him to partake Full happiness with mee, or rather not, But keep the odds of Knowledge in my power Without Copartner? so to add what wants In Femal Sex, the more to draw his Love, And render me more equal, and perhaps A thing not undesireable, somtime Superior; for inferior who is free? This may be well: but what if God have seen, And Death ensue? then I shall be no more, And ADAM wedded to another EVE, Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct; A death to think. Confirm'd then I resolve, ADAM shall share with me in bliss or woe: So dear I love him, that with him all deaths I could endure; without him live no life. So saying, from the Tree her step she turnd, But first low Reverence don, as to the power That dwelt within, whose presence had infus'd Into the plant sciential sap, deriv'd From Nectar, drink of Gods. ADAM the while Waiting desirous her return, had wove Of choicest Flours a Garland to adorne Her Tresses, and her rural labours crown As Reapers oft are wont thir Harvest Queen. Great joy he promis'd to his thoughts, and new Solace in her return, so long delay'd; Yet oft his heart, divine of somthing ill, Misgave him; hee the faultring measure felt; And forth to meet her went, the way she took That Morn when first they parted; by the Tree Of Knowledge he must pass, there he her met, Scarse from the Tree returning; in her hand A bough of fairest fruit that downie smil'd, New gatherd, and ambrosial smell diffus'd. To him she hasted, in her face excuse Came Prologue, and Apologie to prompt, Which with bland words at will she thus addrest. Hast thou not wonderd, ADAM, at my stay? Thee I have misst, and thought it long, depriv'd Thy presence, agonie of love till now Not felt, nor shall be twice, for never more Mean I to trie, what rash untri'd I sought, The paine of absence from thy sight. But strange Hath bin the cause, and wonderful to heare: This Tree is not as we are told, a Tree Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown Op'ning the way, but of Divine effect To open Eyes, and make them Gods who taste; And hath bin tasted such; the Serpent wise, Or not restraind as wee, or not obeying, Hath eat'n of the fruit, and is become, Not dead, as we are threatn'd, but thenceforth Endu'd with human voice and human sense, Reasoning to admiration, and with mee Perswasively hath so prevaild, that I Have also tasted, and have also found Th' effects to correspond, opener mine Eyes, Dimm erst, dilated Spirits, ampler Heart, And growing up to Godhead; which for thee Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise. For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss, Tedious, unshar'd with thee, and odious soon. Thou therefore also taste, that equal Lot May joyne us, equal Joy, as equal Love; Least thou not tasting, different degree Disjoyne us, and I then too late renounce Deitie for thee, when Fate will not permit. Thus EVE with Countnance blithe her storie told; But in her Cheek distemper flushing glowd. On th' other side, ADAM, soon as he heard The fatal Trespass don by EVE, amaz'd, Astonied stood and Blank, while horror chill Ran through his veins, and all his joynts relax'd; From his slack hand the Garland wreath'd for EVE Down drop'd, and all the faded Roses shed: Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length First to himself he inward silence broke. O fairest of Creation, last and best Of all Gods Works, Creature in whom excell'd Whatever can to fight or thought be found, Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet! How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost, Defac't, deflourd, and now to Death devote? Rather how hast thou yeelded to transgress The strict forbiddance, how to violate The sacred Fruit forbidd'n! som cursed fraud Of Enemie hath beguil'd thee, yet unknown, And mee with thee hath ruind, for with thee Certain my resolution is to Die; How can I live without thee, how forgoe Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly joyn'd, To live again in these wilde Woods forlorn? Should God create another EVE, and I Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee Would never from my heart; no no, I feel The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh, Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe. So having said, as one from sad dismay Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbd Submitting to what seemd remediless, Thus in calme mood his Words to EVE he turnd. Bold deed thou hast presum'd, adventrous EVE, And peril great provok't, who thus hast dar'd Had it bin onely coveting to Eye That sacred Fruit, sacred to abstinence, Much more to taste it under banne to touch. But past who can recall, or don undoe? Not God omnipotent, for Fate, yet so Perhaps thou shalt not Die, perhaps the Fact Is not so hainous now, foretasted Fruit, Profan'd first by the Serpent, by him first Made common and unhallowd: ere one tastes; Nor yet on him found deadly; he yet lives, Lives, as thou saidst, and gaines to live as Man Higher degree of Life, inducement strong To us, as likely tasting to attaine Proportional ascent, which cannot be But to be Gods, or Angels Demi-gods. Nor can I think that God, Creator wise, Though threatning, will in earnest so destroy Us his prime Creatures, dignifi'd so high, Set over all his Works, which in our Fall, For us created, needs with us must faile, Dependent made; so God shall uncreate, Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour loose, Not well conceav'd of God, who though his Power Creation could repeate, yet would be loath Us to abolish, least the Adversary Triumph and say; Fickle their State whom God Most Favors, who can please him long? Mee first He ruind, now Mankind; whom will he next? Matter of scorne, not to be given the Foe. However I with thee have fixt my Lot, Certain to undergoe like doom, if Death Consort with thee, Death is to mee as Life; So forcible within my heart I feel The Bond of Nature draw me to my owne, My own in thee, for what thou art is mine; Our State cannot be severd, we are one, One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self. So ADAM, and thus EVE to him repli'd. O glorious trial of exceeding Love, Illustrious evidence, example high! Ingaging me to emulate, but short Of thy perfection, how shall I attaine, ADAM, from whose deare side I boast me sprung, And gladly of our Union heare thee speak, One Heart, one Soul in both; whereof good prooff This day affords, declaring thee resolvd, Rather then Death or aught then Death more dread Shall separate us, linkt in Love so deare, To undergoe with mee one Guilt, one Crime, If any be, of tasting this fair Fruit, Whose vertue, for of good still good proceeds, Direct, or by occasion hath presented This happie trial of thy Love, which else So eminently never had bin known. Were it I thought Death menac't would ensue This my attempt, I would sustain alone The worst, and not perswade thee, rather die Deserted, then oblige thee with a fact Pernicious to thy Peace, chiefly assur'd Remarkably so late of thy so true, So faithful Love unequald; but I feel Farr otherwise th' event, not Death, but Life Augmented, op'nd Eyes, new Hopes, new Joyes, Taste so Divine, that what of sweet before Hath toucht my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh. On my experience, ADAM, freely taste, And fear of Death deliver to the Windes. So saying, she embrac'd him, and for joy Tenderly wept, much won that he his Love Had so enobl'd, as of choice to incurr Divine displeasure for her sake, or Death. In recompence for such compliance bad Such recompence best merits from the bough She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit With liberal hand: he scrupl'd not to eat Against his better knowledge, not deceav'd, But fondly overcome with Femal charm. Earth trembl'd from her entrails, as again In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan, Skie lowr'd, and muttering Thunder, som sad drops Wept at compleating of the mortal Sin Original; while ADAM took no thought, Eating his fill, nor EVE to iterate Her former trespass fear'd, the more to soothe Him with her lov'd societie, that now As with new Wine intoxicated both They swim in mirth, and fansie that they feel Divinitie within them breeding wings Wherewith to scorn the Earth: but that false Fruit Farr other operation first displaid, Carnal desire enflaming, hee on EVE Began to cast lascivious Eyes, she him As wantonly repaid; in Lust they burne: Till ADAM thus 'gan EVE to dalliance move. EVE, now I see thou art exact of taste, And elegant, of Sapience no small part, Since to each meaning savour we apply, And Palate call judicious; I the praise Yeild thee, so well this day thou hast purvey'd. Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstain'd From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be In things to us forbidden, it might be wish'd, For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten. But come, so well refresh't, now let us play, As meet is, after such delicious Fare; For never did thy Beautie since the day I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorn'd With all perfections, so enflame my sense With ardor to enjoy thee, fairer now Then ever, bountie of this vertuous Tree. So said he, and forbore not glance or toy Of amorous intent, well understood Of EVE, whose Eye darted contagious Fire. Her hand he seis'd, and to a shadie bank, Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowr'd He led her nothing loath; Flours were the Couch, And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest lap. There they thir fill of Love and Loves disport Took largely, of thir mutual guilt the Seale, The solace of thir sin, till dewie sleep Oppress'd them, wearied with thir amorous play. Soon as the force of that fallacious Fruit, That with exhilerating vapour bland About thir spirits had plaid, and inmost powers Made erre, was now exhal'd, and grosser sleep Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams Encumberd, now had left them, up they rose As from unrest, and each the other viewing, Soon found thir Eyes how op'nd, and thir minds How dark'nd; innocence, that as a veile Had shadow'd them from knowing ill, was gon, Just confidence, and native righteousness, And honour from about them, naked left To guiltie shame hee cover'd, but his Robe Uncover'd more. So rose the DANITE strong HERCULEAN SAMSON from the Harlot-lap Shorn of his strength, They destitute and bare Of all thir vertue: silent, and in face Confounded long they sate, as struck'n mute, Till ADAM, though not less then EVE abasht, At length gave utterance to these words constraind. O EVE, in evil hour thou didst give care To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught To counterfet Mans voice, true in our Fall, False in our promis'd Rising; since our Eyes Op'nd we find indeed, and find we know Both Good and Evil, Good lost and Evil got, Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know, Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void, Our wonted Ornaments now soild and staind, And in our Faces evident the signes Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store; Even shame, the last of evils; of the first Be sure then. How shall I behold the face Henceforth of God or Angel, earst with joy And rapture so oft beheld? those heav'nly shapes Will dazle now this earthly, with thir blaze Insufferably bright. O might I here In solitude live savage, in some glad Obscur'd, where highest Woods impenetrable To Starr or Sun-light, spread thir umbrage broad, And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines, Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs Hide me, where I may never see them more. But let us now, as in bad plight, devise What best may for the present serve to hide The Parts of each from other, that seem most To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen, Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowd, And girded on our loyns, may cover round Those middle parts, that this new commer, Shame, There sit not, and reproach us as unclean. So counsel'd hee, and both together went Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renown'd, But such as at this day to INDIANS known In MALABAR or DECAN spreds her Armes Braunching so broad and long, that in the ground The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow About the Mother Tree, a Pillard shade High overarch't, and echoing Walks between; There oft the INDIAN Herdsman shunning heate Shelters in coole, and tends his pasturing Herds At Loopholes cut through thickest shade: Those Leaves They gatherd, broad as AMAZONIAN Targe, And with what skill they had, together sowd, To gird thir waste, vain Covering if to hide Thir guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike To that first naked Glorie. Such of late COLUMBUS found th' AMERICAN to girt With featherd Cincture, naked else and wilde Among the Trees on Iles and woodie Shores. Thus fenc't, and as they thought, thir shame in part Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind, They sate them down to weep, nor onely Teares Raind at thir Eyes, but high Winds worse within Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate, Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore Thir inward State of Mind, calme Region once And full of Peace, now tost and turbulent: For Understanding rul'd not, and the Will Heard not her lore, both in subjection now To sensual Appetite, who from beneathe Usurping over sovran Reason claimd Superior sway: From thus distemperd brest, ADAM, estrang'd in look and alterd stile, Speech intermitted thus to EVE renewd. Would thou hadst heark'nd to my words, & stai'd With me, as I besought thee, when that strange Desire of wandring this unhappie Morn, I know not whence possessd thee; we had then Remaind still happie, not as now, despoild Of all our good, sham'd, naked, miserable. Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek Such proof, conclude, they then begin to faile. To whom soon mov'd with touch of blame thus EVE. What words have past thy Lips, ADAM severe, Imput'st thou that to my default, or will Of wandering, as thou call'st it, which who knows But might as ill have happ'nd thou being by, Or to thy self perhaps: hadst thou bin there, Or bere th' attempt, thou couldst not have discernd Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake; No ground of enmitie between us known, Why hee should mean me ill, or seek to harme. Was I to have never parted from thy side? As good have grown there still a liveless Rib. Being as I am, why didst not thou the Head Command me absolutely not to go, Going into such danger as thou saidst? Too facil then thou didst not much gainsay, Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss. Hadst thou bin firm and fixt in thy dissent, Neither had I transgress'd, nor thou with mee. To whom then first incenst ADAM repli'd. Is this the Love, is the recompence Of mine to thee, ingrateful EVE, exprest Immutable when thou wert lost, not I, Who might have liv'd and joyd immortal bliss, Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee: And am I now upbraided, as the cause Of thy transgressing? not enough severe, It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more? I warn'd thee, I admonish'd thee, foretold The danger, and the lurking Enemie That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force, And force upon free Will hath here no place. But confidence then bore thee on, secure Either to meet no danger, or to finde Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps I also err'd in overmuch admiring What seemd in thee so perfet, that I thought No evil durst attempt thee, but I rue That errour now, which is become my crime, And thou th' accuser. Thus it shall befall Him who to worth in Women overtrusting Lets her Will rule; restraint she will not brook, And left to her self, if evil thence ensue, Shee first his weak indulgence will accuse. Thus they in mutual accusation spent The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning And of thir vain contest appeer'd no end. Meanwhile the hainous and despightfull act Of SATAN done in Paradise, and how Hee in the Serpent had perverted EVE, Her Husband shee, to taste the fatall fruit, Was known in Heav'n; for what can scape the Eye Of God All-seeing, or deceave his Heart Omniscient, who in all things wise and just, Hinder'd not SATAN to attempt the minde Of Man, with strength entire, and free Will arm'd, Complete to have discover'd and repulst Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend. For still they knew, and ought to have still remember'd The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit, Whoever tempted; which they not obeying, Incurr'd, what could they less, the penaltie, And manifold in sin, deserv'd to fall. Up into Heav'n from Paradise in hast Th' Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad For Man, for of his state by this they knew, Much wondring how the suttle Fiend had stoln Entrance unseen. Soon as th' unwelcome news From Earth arriv'd at Heaven Gate, displeas'd All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare That time Celestial visages, yet mixt With pitie, violated not thir bliss. About the new-arriv'd, in multitudes Th' ethereal People ran, to hear and know How all befell: they towards the Throne Supream Accountable made haste to make appear With righteous plea, thir utmost vigilance, And easily approv'd; when the most High Eternal Father from his secret Cloud, Amidst in Thunder utter'd thus his voice. Assembl'd Angels, and ye Powers return'd From unsuccessful charge, be not dismaid, Nor troubl'd at these tidings from the Earth, Which your sincerest care could not prevent, Foretold so lately what would come to pass, When first this Tempter cross'd the Gulf from Hell. I told ye then he should prevail and speed On his bad Errand, Man should be seduc't And flatter'd out of all, believing lies Against his Maker; no Decree of mine Concurring to necessitate his Fall, Or touch with lightest moment of impulse His free Will, to her own inclining left In eevn scale. But fall'n he is, and now What rests, but that the mortal Sentence pass On his transgression, Death denounc't that day, Which he presumes already vain and void, Because not yet inflicted, as he fear'd, By some immediate stroak; but soon shall find Forbearance no acquittance ere day end. Justice shall not return as bountie scorn'd. But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferr'd All Judgement, whether in Heav'n, or Earth; or Hell. Easie it may be seen that I intend Mercie collegue with Justice, sending thee Mans Friend, his Mediator, his design'd Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntarie, And destin'd Man himself to judge Man fall'n. So spake the Father, and unfoulding bright Toward the right hand his Glorie, on the Son Blaz'd forth unclouded Deitie; he full Resplendent all his Father manifest Express'd, and thus divinely answer'd milde. Father Eternal, thine is to decree, Mine both in Heav'n and Earth to do thy will Supream, that thou in mee thy Son belov'd Mayst ever rest well pleas'd. I go to judge On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou knowst, Whoever judg'd, the worst on mee must light, When time shall be, for so I undertook Before thee; and not repenting, this obtaine Of right, that I may mitigate thir doom On me deriv'd, yet I shall temper so Justice with Mercie, as may illustrate most Them fully satisfied, and thee appease. Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none Are to behold the Judgement, but the judg'd, Those two; the third best absent is condemn'd, Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law Conviction to the Serpent none belongs. Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose Of high collateral glorie: him Thrones and Powers, Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence EDEN and all the Coast in prospect lay. Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes wing'd. Now was the Sun in Western cadence low From Noon, and gentle Aires due at thir hour To fan the Earth now wak'd, and usher in The Eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard Now walking in the Garden, by soft windes Brought to thir Ears, while day declin'd, they heard And from his presence hid themselves among The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God Approaching, thus to ADAM call'd aloud. Where art thou ADAM, wont with joy to meet My coming seen far off? I miss thee here, Not pleas'd, thus entertaind with solitude, Where obvious dutie erewhile appear'd unsaught: Or come I less conspicuous, or what change Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth. He came, and with him EVE, more loth, though first To offend, discount'nanc't both, and discompos'd; Love was not in thir looks, either to God Or to each other, but apparent guilt, And shame, and perturbation, and despaire, Anger, and obstinacie, and hate, and guile. Whence ADAM faultring long, thus answer'd brief. I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice Affraid, being naked, hid my self. To whom The gracious Judge without revile repli'd. My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear'd, But still rejoyc't, how is it now become So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who Hath told thee? hast thou eaten of the Tree Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat? To whom thus ADAM sore beset repli'd. O Heav'n! in evil strait this day I stand Before my Judge, either to undergoe My self the total Crime, or to accuse My other self, the partner of my life; Whose failing, while her Faith to me remaines, I should conceal, and not expose to blame By my complaint; but strict necessitie Subdues me, and calamitous constraint, Least on my head both sin and punishment, However insupportable, be all Devolv'd; though should I hold my peace, yet thou Wouldst easily detect what I conceale. This Woman whom thou mad'st to be my help, And gav'st me as thy perfet gift, so good, So fit, so acceptable, so Divine, That from her hand I could suspect no ill, And what she did, whatever in it self, Her doing seem'd to justifie the deed; Shee gave me of the Tree, and I did eate. To whom the sovran Presence thus repli'd. Was shee thy God, that her thou didst obey Before his voice, or was shee made thy guide, Superior, or but equal, that to her Thou did'st resigne thy Manhood, and the Place Wherein God set thee above her made of thee, And for thee, whose perfection farr excell'd Hers in all real dignitie: Adornd She was indeed, and lovely to attract Were such as under Government well seem'd, Unseemly to beare rule, which was thy part And person, had'st thou known thy self aright. So having said, he thus to EVE in few: Say Woman, what is this which thou hast done? To whom sad EVE with shame nigh overwhelm'd, Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge Bold or loquacious, thus abasht repli'd. The Serpent me beguil'd and I did eate. Which when the Lord God heard, without delay To Judgement he proceeded on th' accus'd Serpent though brute, unable to transferre The Guilt on him who made him instrument Of mischief, and polluted from the end Of his Creation; justly then accurst, As vitiated in Nature: more to know Concern'd not Man since he no further knew Nor alter'd his offence; yet God at last To Satan first in sin his doom apply'd, Though in mysterious terms, judg'd as then best: And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall. Because thou hast done this, thou art accurst Above all Cattel, each Beast of the Field; Upon thy Belly groveling thou shalt goe, And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life. Between Thee and the Woman I will put Enmitie, and between thine and her Seed; Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel. So spake this Oracle, then verifi'd When JESUS son of MARY second EVE, Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heav'n, Prince of the Aire; then rising from his Grave Spoild Principalities and Powers, triumpht In open shew, and with ascention bright Captivity led captive through the Aire, The Realme it self of Satan long usurpt, Whom he shall tread at last under our feet; Eevn hee who now foretold his fatal bruise, And to the Woman thus his Sentence turn'd. Thy sorrow I will greatly multiplie By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will Thine shall submit, hee over thee shall rule. On ADAM last thus judgement he pronounc'd. Because thou hast heark'nd to the voice of thy Wife, And eaten of the Tree concerning which I charg'd thee, saying: Thou shalt not eate thereof, Curs'd is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow Shalt eate thereof all the days of thy Life; Thornes also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth Unbid, and thou shalt eate th' Herb of th' Field, In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eate Bread, Till thou return unto the ground, for thou Out of the ground wast taken, know thy Birth, For dust thou art, and shalt to dust returne. So judg'd he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent, And th' instant stroke of Death denounc't that day Remov'd farr off; then pittying how they stood Before him naked to the aire, that now Must suffer change, disdain'd not to begin Thenceforth the forme of servant to assume, As when he wash'd his servants feet, so now As Father of his Familie he clad Thir nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain, Or as the Snake with youthful Coate repaid; And thought not much to cloath his Enemies: Nor hee thir outward onely with the Skins Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness, Araying cover'd from his Fathers sight. To him with swift ascent he up returnd, Into his blissful bosom reassum'd In glory as of old, to him appeas'd All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man Recounted, mixing intercession sweet. Meanwhile ere thus was sin'd and judg'd on Earth, Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death, In counterview within the Gates, that now Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame Farr into CHAOS, since the Fiend pass'd through, Sin opening, who thus now to Death began. O Son, why sit we here each other viewing Idlely, while Satan our great Author thrives In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides For us his ofspring deare? It cannot be But that success attends him; if mishap, Ere this he had return'd, with fury driv'n By his Avenger, since no place like this Can fit his punishment, or their revenge. Methinks I feel new strength within me rise, Wings growing, and Dominion giv'n me large Beyond this Deep; whatever drawes me on, Or sympathie, or som connatural force Powerful at greatest distance to unite With secret amity things of like kinde By secretest conveyance. Thou my Shade Inseparable must with mee along: For Death from Sin no power can separate. But least the difficultie of passing back Stay his returne perhaps over this Gulfe Impassable, impervious, let us try Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine Not unagreeable, to found a path Over this Maine from Hell to that new World Where Satan now prevailes, a Monument Of merit high to all th' infernal Host, Easing thir passage hence, for intercourse, Or transmigration, as thir lot shall lead. Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn By this new felt attraction and instinct. Whom thus the meager Shadow answerd soon. Goe whither Fate and inclination strong Leads thee, I shall not lag behinde, nor erre The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste The savour of Death from all things there that live: Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid. So saying, with delight he snuff'd the smell Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote, Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lur'd With sent of living Carcasses design'd For death, the following day, in bloodie fight. So sented the grim Feature, and upturn'd His Nostril wide into the murkie Air, Sagacious of his Quarrey from so farr. Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste Wide Anarchie of CHAOS damp and dark Flew divers, & with Power thir Power was great Hovering upon the Waters; what they met Solid or slimie, as in raging Sea Tost up and down, together crowded drove From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell. As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse Upon the CRONIAN Sea, together drive Mountains of Ice, that stop th' imagin'd way Beyond PETSORA Eastward, to the rich CATHAIAN Coast. The aggregated Soyle Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry, As with a Trident smote, and fix't as firm As DELOS floating once; the rest his look Bound with GORGONIAN rigor not to move, And with ASPHALTIC slime; broad as the Gate, Deep to the Roots of Hell the gather'd beach They fasten'd, and the Mole immense wraught on Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge Of length prodigious joyning to the Wall Immoveable of this now fenceless world Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad, Smooth, easie, inoffensive down to Hell. So, if great things to small may be compar'd, XERXES, the Libertie of GREECE to yoke, From SUSA his MEMNONIAN Palace high Came to the Sea, and over HELLESPONT Bridging his way, EUROPE with ASIA joyn'd, And scourg'd with many a stroak th' indignant waves. Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock Over the vext Abyss, following the track Of SATAN, to the selfsame place where hee First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe From out of CHAOS to the outside bare Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made And durable; and now in little space The Confines met of Empyrean Heav'n And of this World, and on the left hand Hell With long reach interpos'd; three sev'ral wayes In sight, to each of these three places led. And now thir way to Earth they had descri'd, To Paradise first tending, when behold SATAN in likeness of an Angel bright Betwixt the CENTAURE and the SCORPION stearing His ZENITH, while the Sun in ARIES rose: Disguis'd he came, but those his Children dear Thir Parent soon discern'd, though in disguise. Hee, after EVE seduc't, unminded slunk Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act By EVE, though all unweeting, seconded Upon her Husband, saw thir shame that sought Vain covertures; but when he saw descend The Son of God to judge them, terrifi'd Hee fled, not hoping to escape, but shun The present, fearing guiltie what his wrauth Might suddenly inflict; that past, return'd By Night, and listning where the hapless Paire Sate in thir sad discourse, and various plaint, Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood Not instant, but of future time. With joy And tidings fraught, to Hell he now return'd, And at the brink of CHAOS, neer the foot Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop't Met who to meet him came, his Ofspring dear. Great joy was at thir meeting, and at sight Of that stupendious Bridge his joy encreas'd. Long hee admiring stood, till Sin, his faire Inchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke. O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds, Thy Trophies, which thou view'st as not thine own, Thou art thir Author and prime Architect: For I no sooner in my Heart divin'd, My Heart, which by a secret harmonie Still moves with thine, joyn'd in connexion sweet, That thou on Earth hadst prosper'd, which thy looks Now also evidence, but straight I felt Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt That I must after thee with this thy Son; Such fatal consequence unites us three: Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds, Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure Detain from following thy illustrious track. Thou hast atchiev'd our libertie, confin'd Within Hell Gates till now, thou us impow'rd To fortifie thus farr, and overlay With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss. Thine now is all this World, thy vertue hath won What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gain'd With odds what Warr hath lost, and fully aveng'd Our foile in Heav'n; here thou shalt Monarch reign, There didst not; there let him still Victor sway, As Battel hath adjudg'd, from this new World Retiring, by his own doom alienated, And henceforth Monarchie with thee divide Of all things, parted by th' Empyreal bounds, His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World, Or trie thee now more dang'rous to his Throne. Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answerd glad. Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both, High proof ye now have giv'n to be the Race Of SATAN for I glorie in the name, Antagonist of Heav'ns Almightie King Amply have merited of me, of all Th' Infernal Empire, that so neer Heav'ns dore Triumphal with triumphal act have met, Mine with this glorious Work, & made one Realm Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent Of easie thorough-fare. Therefore while I Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease To my associate Powers, them to acquaint With these successes, and with them rejoyce, You two this way, among those numerous Orbs All yours, right down to Paradise descend; There dwell & Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth Dominion exercise and in the Aire, Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declar'd, Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill. My Substitutes I send ye, and Create Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might Issuing from mee: on your joynt vigor now My hold of this new Kingdom all depends, Through Sin to Death expos'd by my exploit. If your joynt power prevaile, th' affaires of Hell No detriment need feare, goe and be strong. So saying he dismiss'd them, they with speed Thir course through thickest Constellations held Spreading thir bane; the blasted Starrs lookt wan, And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclips Then sufferd. Th' other way SATAN went down The Causey to Hell Gate; on either side Disparted CHAOS over built exclaimd, And with rebounding surge the barrs assaild, That scorn'd his indignation: through the Gate, Wide open and unguarded, SATAN pass'd, And all about found desolate; for those Appointed to sit there, had left thir charge, Flown to the upper World; the rest were all Farr to the inland retir'd, about the walls Of PANDEMONIUM, Citie and proud seate Of LUCIFER, so by allusion calld, Of that bright Starr to SATAN paragond. There kept thir Watch the Legions, while the Grand In Council sate, sollicitous what chance Might intercept thir Emperour sent, so hee Departing gave command, and they observ'd. As when the TARTAR from his RUSSIAN Foe By ASTRACAN over the Snowie Plaines Retires, or BACTRIAN Sophi from the hornes Of TURKISH Crescent, leaves all waste beyond The Realme of ALADULE, in his retreate To TAURIS or CASBEEN. So these the late Heav'n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell Many a dark League, reduc't in careful Watch Round thir Metropolis, and now expecting Each hour their great adventurer from the search Of Forrein Worlds: he through the midst unmarkt, In shew plebeian Angel militant Of lowest order, past; and from the dore Of that PLUTONIAN Hall, invisible Ascended his high Throne, which under state Of richest texture spred, at th' upper end Was plac't in regal lustre. Down a while He sate, and round about him saw unseen: At last as from a Cloud his fulgent head And shape Starr bright appeer'd, or brighter, clad With what permissive glory since his fall Was left him, or false glitter: All amaz'd At that so sudden blaze the STYGIAN throng Bent thir aspect, and whom they wish'd beheld, Thir mighty Chief returnd: loud was th' acclaime: Forth rush'd in haste the great consulting Peers, Rais'd from thir dark DIVAN, and with like joy Congratulant approach'd him, who with hand Silence, and with these words attention won. For in possession such, not onely of right, I call ye and declare ye now, returnd Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth Triumphant out of this infernal Pit Abominable, accurst, the house of woe, And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess, As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven Little inferiour, by my adventure hard With peril great atchiev'd. Long were to tell What I have don, what sufferd, with what paine Voyag'd the unreal, vast, unbounded deep Of horrible confusion, over which By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav'd To expedite your glorious march; but I Toild out my uncouth passage, forc't to ride Th' untractable Abysse, plung'd in the womb Of unoriginal NIGHT and CHAOS wilde, That jealous of thir secrets fiercely oppos'd My journey strange, with clamorous uproare Protesting Fate supreame; thence how I found The new created World, which fame in Heav'n Long had foretold, a Fabrick wonderful Of absolute perfection, therein Man Plac't in a Paradise, by our exile Made happie: Him by fraud I have seduc'd From his Creator, and the more to increase Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv'n up Both his beloved Man and all his World, To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us, Without our hazard, labour or allarme, To range in, and to dwell, and over Man To rule, as over all he should have rul'd. True is, mee also he hath judg'd, or rather Mee not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape Man I deceav'd: that which to mee belongs, Is enmity, which he will put between Mee and Mankinde; I am to bruise his heel; His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head: A World who would not purchase with a bruise, Or much more grievous pain? Ye have th' account Of my performance: What remaines, ye Gods, But up and enter now into full bliss. So having said, a while he stood, expecting Thir universal shout and high applause To fill his eare, when contrary he hears On all sides, from innumerable tongues A dismal universal hiss, the sound Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long Had leasure, wondring at himself now more; His Visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare, His Armes clung to his Ribs, his Leggs entwining Each other, till supplanted down he fell A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone, Reluctant, but in vaine, a greater power Now rul'd him, punisht in the shape he sin'd, According to his doom: he would have spoke, But hiss for hiss returnd with forked tongue To forked tongue, for now were all transform'd Alike, to Serpents all as accessories To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now With complicated monsters, head and taile, Scorpion and Asp, and AMPHISBAENA dire, CERASTES hornd, HYDRUS, and ELLOPS drear, And DIPSAS Not so thick swarm'd once the Soil Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle OPHIUSA but still greatest hee the midst, Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun Ingenderd in the PYTHIAN Vale on slime, Huge PYTHON, and his Power no less he seem'd Above the rest still to retain; they all Him follow'd issuing forth to th' open Field, Where all yet left of that revolted Rout Heav'n-fall'n, in station stood or just array, Sublime with expectation when to see In Triumph issuing forth thir glorious Chief; They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell, And horrid sympathie; for what they saw, They felt themselvs now changing; down thir arms, Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast, And the dire hiss renew'd, and the dire form Catcht by Contagion, like in punishment, As in thir crime. Thus was th' applause they meant, Turnd to exploding hiss, triumph to shame Cast on themselves from thir own mouths. There stood A Grove hard by, sprung up with this thir change, His will who reigns above, to aggravate Thir penance, laden with fair Fruit, like that VVhich grew in Paradise, the bait of EVE Us'd by the Tempter: on that prospect strange Thir earnest eyes they fix'd, imagining For one forbidden Tree a multitude Now ris'n, to work them furder woe or shame; Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce, Though to delude them sent, could not abstain, But on they rould in heaps, and up the Trees Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks That curld MEGAERA: greedily they pluck'd The Frutage fair to sight, like that which grew Neer that bituminous Lake where SODOM flam'd; This more delusive, not the touch, but taste Deceav'd; they fondly thinking to allay Thir appetite with gust, instead of Fruit Chewd bitter Ashes, which th' offended taste VVith spattering noise rejected: oft they assayd, Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as oft, VVith hatefullest disrelish writh'd thir jaws VVith foot and cinders fill'd; so oft they fell Into the same illusion, not as Man Whom they triumph'd once lapst. Thus were they plagu'd And worn with Famin, long and ceasless hiss, Till thir lost shape, permitted, they resum'd, Yearly enjoynd, some say, to undergo This annual humbling certain number'd days, To dash thir pride, and joy for Man seduc't. However some tradition they dispers'd Among the Heathen of thir purchase got, And Fabl'd how the Serpent, whom they calld OPHION with EURYNOME, the wide- Encroaching EVE perhaps, had first the rule Of high OLYMPUS, thence by SATURN driv'n And OPS, ere yet DICTAEAN JOVE was born. Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair Too soon arriv'd, SIN there in power before, Once actual, now in body, and to dwell Habitual habitant; behind her DEATH Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet On his pale Horse: to whom SIN thus began. Second of SATAN sprung, all conquering Death, What thinkst thou of our Empire now, though earnd With travail difficult, not better farr Then stil at Hels dark threshold to have sate watch, Unnam'd, undreaded, and thy self half starv'd? Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answerd soon. To mee, who with eternal Famin pine, There best, where most with ravin I may meet; Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps. To whom th' incestuous Mother thus repli'd. Thou therefore on these Herbs, and Fruits, & Flours Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Fowle, No homely morsels, and whatever thing The Sithe of Time mowes down, devour unspar'd, Till I in Man residing through the Race, His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect, And season him thy last and sweetest prey. This said, they both betook them several wayes, Both to destroy, or unimmortal make All kinds, and for destruction to mature Sooner or later; which th' Almightie seeing, From his transcendent Seat the Saints among, To those bright Orders utterd thus his voice. See with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance To waste and havoc yonder VVorld, which I So fair and good created, and had still Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man Let in these wastful Furies, who impute Folly to mee, so doth the Prince of Hell And his Adherents, that with so much ease I suffer them to enter and possess A place so heav'nly, and conniving seem To gratifie my scornful Enemies, That laugh, as if transported with some fit Of Passion, I to them had quitted all, At random yeilded up to their misrule; And know not that I call'd and drew them thither My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed On what was pure, till cramm'd and gorg'd, nigh burst With suckt and glutted offal, at one fling Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son, Both SIN, and DEATH, and yawning GRAVE at last Through CHAOS hurld, obstruct the mouth of Hell For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jawes. Then Heav'n and Earth renewd shall be made pure To sanctitie that shall receive no staine: Till then the Curse pronounc't on both precedes. Hee ended, and the heav'nly Audience loud Sung HALLELUIA, as the sound of Seas, Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways, Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son, Destin'd restorer of Mankind, by whom New Heav'n and Earth shall to the Ages rise, Or down from Heav'n descend. Such was thir song, While the Creator calling forth by name His mightie Angels gave them several charge, As sorted best with present things. The Sun Had first his precept so to move, so shine, As might affect the Earth with cold and heat Scarce tollerable, and from the North to call Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring Solstitial summers heat. To the blanc Moone Her office they prescrib'd, to th' other five Thir planetarie motions and aspects Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixt Thir influence malignant when to showre, Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling, Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set Thir corners, when with bluster to confound Sea, Aire, and Shoar, the Thunder when to rowle With terror through the dark Aereal Hall. Some say he bid his Angels turne ascanse The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more From the Suns Axle; they with labour push'd Was bid turn Reines from th' Equinoctial Rode Like distant breadth to TAURUS with the Seav'n ATLANTICK Sisters, and the SPARTAN Twins Up to the TROPIC Crab; thence down amaine By LEO and the VIRGIN and the SCALES, As deep as CAPRICORNE, to bring in change Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring Perpetual smil'd on Earth with vernant Flours, Equal in Days and Nights, except to those Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day Had unbenighted shon, while the low Sun To recompence his distance, in thir sight Had rounded still th' HORIZON, and not known Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow From cold ESTOTILAND, and South as farr Beneath MAGELLAN. At that tasted Fruit The Sun, as from THYESTEAN Banquet, turn'd His course intended; else how had the World Inhabited, though sinless, more then now, Avoided pinching cold and scorching heate? These changes in the Heav'ns, though slow, produc'd Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast, Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot, Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North Of NORUMBEGA, and the SAMOED shoar Bursting thir brazen Dungeon, armd with ice And snow and haile and stormie gust and flaw, And THRASCIAS rend the Woods and Seas upturn; With adverse blast up-turns them from the South NOTUS and AFER black with thundrous Clouds From SERRALIONA; thwart of these as fierce Forth rush the LEVANT and the PONENT VVindes EURUS and ZEPHIR with thir lateral noise, SIROCCO, and LIBECCHIO. Thus began Outrage from liveless things; but Discord first Daughter of Sin, among th' irrational, Death introduc'd through fierce antipathie: Beast now with Beast gan war, & Fowle with Fowle, And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving, Devourd each other; nor stood much in awe Of Man, but fled him, or with count'nance grim Glar'd on him passing: these were from without The growing miseries, which ADAM saw Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomiest shade, To sorrow abandond, but worse felt within, And in a troubl'd Sea of passion tost, Thus to disburd'n sought with sad complaint. O miserable of happie! is this the end Of this new glorious World, and mee so late The Glory of that Glory, who now becom Accurst of blessed, hide me from the face Of God, whom to behold was then my highth Of happiness: yet well, if here would end The miserie, I deserv'd it, and would beare My own deservings; but this will not serve; All that I eate or drink, or shall beget, Is propagated curse. O voice once heard Now death to heare! for what can I encrease Or multiplie, but curses on my head? Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling The evil on him brought by me, will curse My Head, Ill fare our Ancestor impure, For this we may thank ADAM; but his thanks Shall be the execration; so besides Mine own that bide upon me, all from mee Shall with a fierce reflux on mee redound, On mee as on thir natural center light Heavie, though in thir place. O fleeting joyes Of Paradise, deare bought with lasting woes! Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay To mould me Man, did I sollicite thee From darkness to promote me, or here place In this delicious Garden? as my Will Concurd not to my being, it were but right And equal to reduce me to my dust, Desirous to resigne, and render back All I receav'd, unable to performe Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold The good I sought not. To the loss of that, Sufficient penaltie, why hast thou added The sense of endless woes? inexplicable Thy Justice seems; yet to say truth, too late, I thus contest; then should have been refusd Those terms whatever, when they were propos'd: Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good, Then cavil the conditions? and though God Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son Prove disobedient, and reprov'd, retort, Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not: Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee That proud excuse? yet him not thy election, But Natural necessity begot. God made thee of choice his own, and of his own To serve him, thy reward was of his grace, Thy punishment then justly is at his Will. Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair, That dust I am, and shall to dust returne: O welcom hour whenever! why delayes His hand to execute what his Decree Fixd on this day? why do I overlive, Why am I mockt with death, and length'nd out To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet Mortalitie my sentence, and be Earth Insensible, how glad would lay me down As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse To mee and to my ofspring would torment me With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt Pursues me still, least all I cannot die, Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man Which God inspir'd, cannot together perish With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave, Or in some other dismal place, who knows But I shall die a living Death? O thought Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath Of Life that sinn'd; what dies but what had life And sin? the Bodie properly hath neither. All of me then shall die: let this appease The doubt, since humane reach no further knows. For though the Lord of all be infinite, Is his wrauth also? be it, man is not so, But mortal doom'd. How can he exercise Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end? Can he make deathless Death? that were to make Strange contradiction, which to God himself Impossible is held, as Argument Of weakness, not of Power. Will he, draw out, For angers sake, finite to infinite In punisht man, to satisfie his rigour Satisfi'd never; that were to extend His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law, By which all Causes else according still To the reception of thir matter act, Not to th' extent of thir own Spheare. But say That Death be not one stroak, as I suppos'd, Bereaving sense, but endless miserie From this day onward, which I feel begun Both in me, and without me, and so last To perpetuitie; Ay me, that fear Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution On my defensless head; both Death and I Am found Eternal, and incorporate both, Nor I on my part single, in mee all Posteritie stands curst: Fair Patrimonie That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able To waste it all my self, and leave ye none! So disinherited how would ye bless Me now your Curse! Ah, why should all mankind For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemn'd, If guiltless? But from mee what can proceed, But all corrupt, both Mind and Will deprav'd, Not to do onely, but to will the same With me? how can they acquitted stand In sight of God? Him after all Disputes Forc't I absolve: all my evasions vain And reasonings, though through Mazes, lead me still But to my own conviction: first and last On mee, mee onely, as the sourse and spring Of all corruption, all the blame lights due; So might the wrauth, Fond wish! couldst thou support That burden heavier then the Earth to bear, Then all the world much heavier, though divided With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desir'st, And what thou fearst, alike destroyes all hope Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable Beyond all past example and future, To SATAN onely like both crime and doom. O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears And horrors hast thou driv'n me; out of which I find no way, from deep to deeper plung'd! Thus ADAM to himself lamented loud Through the still Night, now now, as ere man fell, Wholsom and cool, and mild, but with black Air Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom, Which to his evil Conscience represented All things with double terror: On the ground Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft Curs'd his Creation, Death as oft accus'd The day of his offence. Why comes not Death, Said hee, with one thrice acceptable stroke To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word, Justice Divine not hast'n to be just? But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries. VVith other echo farr I taught your Shades To answer, and resound farr other Song. VVhom thus afflicted when sad EVE beheld, Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh, Soft words to his fierce passion she assay'd: But her with stern regard he thus repell'd. Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best Befits thee with him leagu'd, thy self as false And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape, Like his, and colour Serpentine may shew Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee Henceforth; least that too heav'nly form, pretended To hellish falshood, snare them. But for thee I had persisted happie, had not thy pride And wandring vanitie, when lest was safe, Rejected my forewarning, and disdain'd Not to be trusted, longing to be seen Though by the Devil himself, him overweening To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting Fool'd and beguil'd, by him thou, I by thee, To trust thee from my side, imagin'd wise, Constant, mature, proof against all assaults, And understood not all was but a shew Rather then solid vertu, all but a Rib Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears, More to the part sinister from me drawn, Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie To my just number found. O why did God, Creator wise, that peopl'd highest Heav'n With Spirits Masculine, create at last This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect Of Nature, and not fill the World at once With Men as Angels without Feminine, Or find some other way to generate Mankind? this mischief had not then befall'n, And more that shall befall, innumerable Disturbances on Earth through Femal snares, And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either He never shall find out fit Mate, but such As some misfortune brings him, or mistake, Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain Through her perverseness, but shall see her gaind By a farr worse, or if she love, withheld By Parents, or his happiest choice too late Shall meet, alreadie linkt and Wedlock-bound To a fell Adversarie, his hate or shame: Which infinite calamitie shall cause To humane life, and houshold peace confound. He added not, and from her turn'd, but EVE Not so repulst, with Tears that ceas'd not flowing, And tresses all disorderd, at his feet Fell humble, and imbracing them, besaught His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint. Forsake me not thus, ADAM, witness Heav'n What love sincere, and reverence in my heart I beare thee, and unweeting have offended, Unhappilie deceav'd; thy suppliant I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not, Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid, Thy counsel in this uttermost distress, My onely strength and stay: forlorn of thee, Whither shall I betake me, where subsist? While yet we live, scarse one short hour perhaps, Between us two let there be peace, both joyning, As joyn'd in injuries, one enmitie Against a Foe by doom express assign'd us, That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not Thy hatred for this miserie befall'n, On me already lost, mee then thy self More miserable; both have sin'd, but thou Against God onely, I against God and thee, And to the place of judgement will return, There with my cries importune Heaven, that all The sentence from thy head remov'd may light On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe, Mee mee onely just object of his ire. She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight, Immoveable till peace obtain'd from fault Acknowledg'd and deplor'd, in ADAM wraught Commiseration; soon his heart relented Towards her, his life so late and sole delight, Now at his feet submissive in distress, Creature so faire his reconcilement seeking, His counsel whom she had displeas'd, his aide; As one disarm'd, his anger all he lost, And thus with peaceful words uprais'd her soon. Unwarie, and too desirous, as before, So now of what thou knowst not, who desir'st The punishment all on thy self; alas, Beare thine own first, ill able to sustaine His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part, And my displeasure bearst so ill. If Prayers Could alter high Decrees, I to that place Would speed before thee, and be louder heard, That on my head all might be visited, Thy frailtie and infirmer Sex forgiv'n, To me committed and by me expos'd. But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame Each other, blam'd enough elsewhere, but strive In offices of Love, how we may light'n Each others burden in our share of woe; Since this days Death denounc't, if ought I see, Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac't evill, A long days dying to augment our paine, And to our Seed O hapless Seed! deriv'd. To whom thus EVE, recovering heart, repli'd. ADAM, by sad experiment I know How little weight my words with thee can finde, Found so erroneous, thence by just event Found so unfortunate; nevertheless, Restor'd by thee, vile as I am, to place Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart, Living or dying from thee I will not hide What thoughts in my unquiet brest are ris'n, Tending to som relief of our extremes, Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable, As in our evils, and of easier choice. If care of our descent perplex us most, Which must be born to certain woe, devourd By Death at last, and miserable it is To be to others cause of misery, Our own begotten, and of our Loines to bring Into this cursed World a woful Race, That after wretched Life must be at last Food for so foule a Monster, in thy power It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent The Race unblest, to being yet unbegot. Childless thou art, Childless remaine: So Death shall be deceav'd his glut, and with us two Be forc'd to satisfie his Rav'nous Maw. But if thou judge it hard and difficult, Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain From Loves due Rites, Nuptial embraces sweet, And with desire to languish without hope, Before the present object languishing With like desire, which would be miserie And torment less then none of what we dread, Then both our selves and Seed at once to free From what we fear for both, let us make short, Let us seek Death, or hee not found, supply With our own hands his Office on our selves; Why stand we longer shivering under feares, That shew no end but Death, and have the power, Of many wayes to die the shortest choosing, Destruction with destruction to destroy. She ended heer, or vehement despaire Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts Had entertaind, as di'd her Cheeks with pale. But ADAM with such counsel nothing sway'd, To better hopes his more attentive minde Labouring had rais'd, and thus to EVE repli'd. EVE, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems To argue in thee somthing more sublime And excellent then what thy minde contemnes; But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes That excellence thought in thee, and implies, Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret For loss of life and pleasure overlov'd. Or if thou covet death, as utmost end Of miserie, so thinking to evade The penaltie pronounc't, doubt not but God Hath wiselier arm'd his vengeful ire then so To be forestall'd; much more I fear least Death So snatcht will not exempt us from the paine We are by doom to pay; rather such acts Of contumacie will provoke the highest To make death in us live: Then let us seek Som safer resolution, which methinks I have in view, calling to minde with heed Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe SATAN, who in the Serpent hath contriv'd Against us this deceit: to crush his head Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost By death brought on our selves, or childless days Resolv'd, as thou proposest; so our Foe Shall scape his punishment ordain'd, and wee Instead shall double ours upon our heads. No more be mention'd then of violence Against our selves, and wilful barrenness, That cuts us off from hope, and savours onely Rancor and pride, impatience and despite, Reluctance against God and his just yoke Laid on our Necks. Remember with what mild And gracious temper he both heard and judg'd Without wrauth or reviling; wee expected Immediate dissolution, which we thought Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee Pains onely in Child-bearing were foretold, And bringing forth, soon recompenc't with joy, Fruit of thy Womb: On mee the Curse aslope Glanc'd on the ground, with labour I must earne My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse; My labour will sustain me; and least Cold Or Heat should injure us, his timely care Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands Cloath'd us unworthie, pitying while he judg'd; How much more, if we pray him, will his ear Be open, and his heart to pitie incline, And teach us further by what means to shun Th' inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow, Which now the Skie with various Face begins To shew us in this Mountain, while the Winds Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek Som better shroud, som better warmth to cherish Our Limbs benumm'd, ere this diurnal Starr Leave cold the Night, how we his gather'd beams Reflected, may with matter sere foment, Or by collision of two bodies grinde The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds Justling or pusht with Winds rude in thir shock Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driv'n down Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine, And sends a comfortable heat from farr, Which might supplie the Sun: such Fire to use, And what may else be remedie or cure To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought, Hee will instruct us praying, and of Grace Beseeching him, so as we need not fear To pass commodiously this life, sustain'd By him with many comforts, till we end In dust, our final rest and native home. What better can we do, then to the place Repairing where he judg'd us, prostrate fall Before him reverent, and there confess Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears VVatering the ground, and with our sighs the Air Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Undoubtedly he will relent and turn From his displeasure; in whose look serene, VVhen angry most he seem'd and most severe, VVhat else but favor, grace, and mercie shon? So spake our Father penitent, nor EVE Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place Repairing where he judg'd them prostrate fell Before him reverent, and both confess'd Humbly thir faults, and pardon beg'd, with tears VVatering the ground, and with thir sighs the Air Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Thus they in lowliest plight repentant stood Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above Prevenient Grace descending had remov'd The stonie from thir hearts, and made new flesh Regenerat grow instead, that sighs now breath'd Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer Inspir'd, and wing'd for Heav'n with speedier flight Then loudest Oratorie: yet thir port Not of mean suiters, nor important less Seem'd thir Petition, then when th' ancient Pair In Fables old, less ancient yet then these, DEUCALION and chaste PYRRHA to restore The Race of Mankind drownd, before the Shrine Of THEMIS stood devout. To Heav'n thir prayers Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious windes Blow'n vagabond or frustrate: in they passd Dimentionless through Heav'nly dores; then clad With incense, where the Golden Altar fum'd, By thir great Intercessor, came in sight Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son Presenting, thus to intercede began. See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixt With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring, Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those Which his own hand manuring all the Trees Of Paradise could have produc't, ere fall'n From innocence. Now therefore bend thine eare To supplication, heare his sighs though mute; Unskilful with what words to pray, let mee Interpret for him, mee his Advocate And propitiation, all his works on mee Good or not good ingraft, my Merit those Shall perfet, and for these my Death shall pay. Accept me, and in mee from these receave The smell of peace toward Mankinde, let him live Before thee reconcil'd, at least his days Numberd, though sad, till Death, his doom which I To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse To better life shall yeeld him, where with mee All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliss, Made one with me as I with thee am one. To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene. All thy request for Man, accepted Son, Obtain, all thy request was my Decree: But longer in that Paradise to dwell, The Law I gave to Nature him forbids: Those pure immortal Elements that know No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foule, Eject him tainted now, and purge him off As a distemper, gross to aire as gross, And mortal food, as may dispose him best For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first Distemperd all things, and of incorrupt Corrupted. I at first with two fair gifts Created him endowd, with Happiness And Immortalitie: that fondly lost, This other serv'd but to eternize woe; Till I provided Death; so Death becomes His final remedie, and after Life Tri'd in sharp tribulation, and refin'd By Faith and faithful works, to second Life, Wak't in the renovation of the just, Resignes him up with Heav'n and Earth renewd. But let us call to Synod all the Blest Through Heav'ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed, As how with peccant Angels late they saw; And in thir state, though firm, stood more confirmd. He ended, and the Son gave signal high To the bright Minister that watchd, hee blew His Trumpet, heard in OREB since perhaps When God descended, and perhaps once more To sound at general Doom. Th' Angelic blast Filld all the Regions: from thir blissful Bowrs Of AMARANTIN Shade, Fountain or Spring, By the waters of Life, where ere they sate In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light Hasted, resorting to the Summons high, And took thir Seats; till from his Throne supream Th' Almighty thus pronounced his sovran Will. O Sons, like one of us Man is become To know both Good and Evil, since his taste Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got, Happier, had it suffic'd him to have known Good by it self, and Evil not at all. He sorrows now, repents, and prayes contrite, My motions in him, longer then they move, His heart I know, how variable and vain Self-left. Least therefore his now bolder hand Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat, And live for ever, dream at least to live Forever, to remove him I decree, And send him from the Garden forth to Till The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soile. MICHAEL, this my behest have thou in charge, Take to thee from among the Cherubim Thy choice of flaming Warriours, least the Fiend Or in behalf of Man, or to invade Vacant possession som new trouble raise: Hast thee, and from the Paradise of God Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair, From hallowd ground th' unholie, and denounce To them and to thir Progenie from thence Perpetual banishment. Yet least they faint At the sad Sentence rigorously urg'd, For I behold them soft'nd and with tears Bewailing thir excess, all terror hide. If patiently thy bidding they obey, Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveale To ADAM what shall come in future dayes, As I shall thee enlighten, intermix My Cov'nant in the Womans seed renewd; So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace: And on the East side of the Garden place, Where entrance up from EDEN easiest climbes, Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame Wide waving, all approach farr off to fright, And guard all passage to the Tree of Life: Least Paradise a receptacle prove To Spirits foule, and all my Trees thir prey, With whose stol'n Fruit Man once more to delude. He ceas'd; and th' Archangelic Power prepar'd For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each Had, like a double JANUS, all thir shape Spangl'd with eyes more numerous then those Of ARGUS, and more wakeful then to drouze, Charm'd with ARCADIAN Pipe, the Pastoral Reed Of HERMES, or his opiate Rod. Meanwhile To resalute the World with sacred Light LEUCOTHEA wak'd, and with fresh dews imbalmd The Earth, when ADAM and first Matron EVE Had ended now thir Orisons, and found, Strength added from above, new hope to spring Out of despaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt; Which thus to EVE his welcome words renewd. EVE, easily may Faith admit, that all The good which we enjoy, from Heav'n descends But that from us ought should ascend to Heav'n So prevalent as to concerne the mind Of God high blest, or to incline his will, Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer, Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne Ev'n to the Seat of God. For since I saught By Prayer th' offended Deitie to appease, Kneel'd and before him humbl'd all my heart, Methought I saw him placable and mild, Bending his eare; perswasion in me grew That I was heard with favour; peace returnd Home to my brest, and to my memorie His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe; Which then not minded in dismay, yet now Assures me that the bitterness of death Is past, and we shall live. Whence Haile to thee, EVE rightly call'd, Mother of all Mankind, Mother of all things living, since by thee Man is to live, and all things live for Man. To whom thus EVE with sad demeanour meek. Ill worthie I such title should belong To me transgressour, who for thee ordaind A help, became thy snare; to mee reproach Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise: But infinite in pardon was my Judge, That I who first brought Death on all, am grac't The sourse of life; next favourable thou, Who highly thus to entitle me voutsaf't, Farr other name deserving. But the Field To labour calls us now with sweat impos'd, Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn, All unconcern'd with our unrest, begins Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth, I never from thy side henceforth to stray, Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell, What can be toilsom in these pleasant Walkes? Here let us live, though in fall'n state, content. So spake, so wish'd much-humbl'd EVE, but Fate Subscrib'd not; Nature first gave Signs, imprest On Bird, Beast, Aire, Aire suddenly eclips'd After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight The Bird of JOVE, stoopt from his aerie tour, Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove: Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods, First Hunter then, pursu'd a gentle brace, Direct to th' Eastern Gate was bent thir flight. ADAM observ'd, and with his Eye the chase Pursuing, not unmov'd to EVE thus spake. O EVE, some furder change awaits us nigh, Which Heav'n by these mute signs in Nature shews Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn Us haply too secure of our discharge From penaltie, because from death releast Some days; how long, and what till then our life, Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust, And thither must return and be no more. VVhy else this double object in our sight Of flight pursu'd in th' Air and ore the ground One way the self-same hour? why in the East Darkness ere Dayes mid-course, and Morning light More orient in yon VVestern Cloud that draws O're the blew Firmament a radiant white, And slow descends, with somthing heav'nly fraught. He err'd not, for by this the heav'nly Bands Down from a Skie of Jasper lighted now In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt, A glorious Apparition, had not doubt And carnal fear that day dimm'd ADAMS eye. Not that more glorious, when the Angels met JACOB in MAHANAIM, where he saw The field Pavilion'd with his Guardians bright; Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeerd In DOTHAN, cover'd with a Camp of Fire, Against the SYRIAN King, who to surprize One man, Assassin-like had levied Warr, Warr unproclam'd. The Princely Hierarch In thir bright stand, there left his Powers to seise Possession of the Garden; hee alone, To finde where ADAM shelterd, took his way, Not unperceav'd of ADAM, who to EVE, While the great Visitant approachd, thus spake. EVE, now expect great tidings, which perhaps Of us will soon determin, or impose New Laws to be observ'd; for I descrie From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill One of the heav'nly Host, and by his Gate None of the meanest, some great Potentate Or of the Thrones above, such Majestie Invests him coming; yet not terrible, That I should fear, nor sociably mild, As RAPHAEL, that I should much confide, But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend, With reverence I must meet, and thou retire. He ended; and th' Arch-Angel soon drew nigh, Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Armes A militarie Vest of purple flowd Livelier then MELIBOEAN, or the graine Of SARRA, worn by Kings and Hero's old In time of Truce; IRIS had dipt the wooff; His starrie Helme unbuckl'd shew'd him prime In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side As in a glistering ZODIAC hung the Sword, Satans dire dread, and in his hand the Spear. ADAM bowd low, hee Kingly from his State Inclin'd not, but his coming thus declar'd. ADAM, Heav'ns high behest no Preface needs: Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death, Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress, Defeated of his seisure many dayes Giv'n thee of Grace, wherein thou may'st repent, And one bad act with many deeds well done Mayst cover: well may then thy Lord appeas'd Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claimes; But longer in this Paradise to dwell Permits not; to remove thee I am come, And send thee from the Garden forth to till The ground whence thou wast tak'n, fitter Soile. He added not, for ADAM at the newes Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood, That all his senses bound; EVE, who unseen Yet all had heard, with audible lament Discover'd soon the place of her retire. O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death! Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave Thee Native Soile, these happie Walks and Shades, Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend, Quiet though sad, the respit of that day That must be mortal to us both. O flours, That never will in other Climate grow, My early visitation, and my last At Eev'n, which I bred up with tender hand From the first op'ning bud, and gave ye Names, Who now shall reare ye to the Sun, or ranke Your Tribes, and water from th' ambrosial Fount? Thee lastly nuptial Bowre, by mee adornd With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee How shall I part, and whither wander down Into a lower World, to this obscure And wilde, how shall we breath in other Aire Less pure, accustomd to immortal Fruits? Whom thus the Angel interrupted milde. Lament not EVE, but patiently resigne What justly thou hast lost; nor set thy heart, Thus over fond, on that which is not thine; Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound; Where he abides, think there thy native soile. ADAM by this from the cold sudden damp Recovering, and his scatterd spirits returnd, To MICHAEL thus his humble words addressd. Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or nam'd Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem Prince above Princes, gently hast thou tould Thy message, which might else in telling wound, And in performing end us; what besides Of sorrow and dejection and despair Our frailtie can sustain, thy tidings bring, Departure from this happy place, our sweet Recess, and onely consolation left Familiar to our eyes, all places else Inhospitable appeer and desolate, Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer Incessant I could hope to change the will Of him who all things can, I would not cease To wearie him with my assiduous cries: But prayer against his absolute Decree No more availes then breath against the winde, Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth: Therefore to his great bidding I submit. This most afflicts me, that departing hence, As from his face I shall be hid, deprivd His blessed count'nance; here I could frequent, With worship, place by place where he voutsaf'd Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate; On this Mount he appeerd, under this Tree Stood visible, among these Pines his voice I heard, here with him at this Fountain talk'd: So many grateful Altars I would reare Of grassie Terfe, and pile up every Stone Of lustre from the brook, in memorie, Or monument to Ages, and thereon Offer sweet smelling Gumms & Fruits and Flours: In yonder nether World where shall I seek His bright appearances, or footstep trace? For though I fled him angrie, yet recall'd To life prolongd and promisd Race, I now Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts Of glory, and farr off his steps adore. To whom thus MICHAEL with regard benigne. ADAM, thou know'st Heav'n his, and all the Earth Not this Rock onely; his Omnipresence fills Land, Sea, and Aire, and every kinde that lives, Fomented by his virtual power and warmd: All th' Earth he gave thee to possess and rule, No despicable gift; surmise not then His presence to these narrow bounds confin'd Of Paradise or EDEN: this had been Perhaps thy Capital Seate, from whence had spred All generations, and had hither come From all the ends of th' Earth, to celebrate And reverence thee thir great Progenitor. But this praeeminence thou hast lost, brought down To dwell on eeven ground now with thy Sons: Yet doubt not but in Vallie and in Plaine God is as here, and will be found alike Present, and of his presence many a signe Still following thee, still compassing thee round With goodness and paternal Love, his Face Express, and of his steps the track Divine. Which that thou mayst beleeve, and be confirmd, Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent To shew thee what shall come in future dayes To thee and to thy Ofspring; good with bad Expect to hear, supernal Grace contending With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn True patience, and to temper joy with fear And pious sorrow, equally enur'd By moderation either state to beare, Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead Safest thy life, and best prepar'd endure Thy mortal passage when it comes. Ascend This Hill; let EVE for I have drencht her eyes Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak'st, As once thou slepst, while Shee to life was formd. To whom thus ADAM gratefully repli'd. Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path Thou lead'st me, and to the hand of Heav'n submit, However chast'ning, to the evil turne My obvious breast, arming to overcom By suffering, and earne rest from labour won, If so I may attain. So both ascend Of Paradise the highest, from whose top The Hemisphere of Earth in cleerest Ken Stretcht out to amplest reach of prospect lay. Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round, Whereon for different cause the Tempter set Our second ADAM in the Wilderness, To shew him all Earths Kingdomes and thir Glory. His Eye might there command wherever stood City of old or modern Fame, the Seat Of mightiest Empire, from the destind Walls To PAQUIN of SINAEAN Kings, and thence To AGRA and LAHOR of great MOGUL Down to the golden CHERSONESE, or where The PERSIAN in ECBATAN sate, or since In MOSCO, or the Sultan in BIZANCE, TURCHESTAN-born; nor could his eye not ken Th' Empire of NEGUS to his utmost Port ERCOCO and the less Maritine Kings And SOFALA thought OPHIR, to the Realme Of CONGO, and ANGOLA fardest South; Or thence from NIGER Flood to ATLAS Mount The Kingdoms of ALMANSOR, FEZ, and SUS, On EUROPE thence, and where ROME was to sway The VVorld: in Spirit perhaps he also saw Rich MEXICO the seat of MOTEZUME, And CUSCO in PERU, the richer seat Of ATABALIPA, and yet unspoil'd GUIANA, whose great Citie GERYONS Sons Call EL DORADO: but to nobler sights MICHAEL from ADAMS eyes the Filme remov'd VVhich that false Fruit that promis'd clearer sight Had bred; then purg'd with Euphrasie and Rue The visual Nerve, for he had much to see; And from the VVell of Life three drops instill'd. So deep the power of these Ingredients pierc'd, Eevn to the inmost seat of mental sight, That ADAM now enforc't to close his eyes, Sunk down and all his Spirits became intranst: But him the gentle Angel by the hand Soon rais'd, and his attention thus recall'd. ADAM, now ope thine eyes, and first behold Th' effects which thy original crime hath wrought In some to spring from thee, who never touch'd Th' excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conspir'd, Nor sinn'd thy sin, yet from that sin derive Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds. His eyes he op'nd, and beheld a field, Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves New reapt, the other part sheep-walks and foulds; Ith' midst an Altar as the Land-mark stood Rustic, of grassie sord; thither anon A sweatie Reaper from his Tillage brought First Fruits, the green Eare, and the yellow Sheaf, Uncull'd, as came to hand; a Shepherd next More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid The Inwards and thir Fat, with Incense strew'd, On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites perform'd. His Offring soon propitious Fire from Heav'n Consum'd with nimble glance, and grateful steame; The others not, for his was not sincere; Whereat hee inlie rag'd, and as they talk'd, Smote him into the Midriff with a stone That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale Groand out his Soul with gushing bloud effus'd. Much at that sight was ADAM in his heart Dismai'd, and thus in haste to th' Angel cri'd. O Teacher, some great mischief hath befall'n To that meek man, who well had sacrific'd; Is Pietie thus and pure Devotion paid? T' whom MICHAEL thus, hee also mov'd, repli'd. These two are Brethren, ADAM, and to come Out of thy loyns; th' unjust the just hath slain, For envie that his Brothers Offering found From Heav'n acceptance; but the bloodie Fact Will be aveng'd, and th' others Faith approv'd Loose no reward, though here thou see him die, Rowling in dust and gore. To which our Sire. Alas, both for the deed and for the cause! But have I now seen Death? Is this the way I must return to native dust? O sight Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold, Horrid to think, how horrible to feel! To whom thus MICHAEL. Death thou hast seen In his first shape on man; but many shapes Of Death, and many are the wayes that lead To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense More terrible at th' entrance then within. Some, as thou saw'st, by violent stroke shall die, By Fire, Flood, Famin, by Intemperance more In Meats and Drinks, which on the Earth shal bring Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew Before thee shall appear; that thou mayst know What miserie th' inabstinence of EVE Shall bring on men. Immediately a place Before his eyes appeard, sad, noysom, dark, A Lazar-house it seemd, wherein were laid Numbers of all diseas'd, all maladies Of gastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualmes Of heart-sick Agonie, all feavorous kinds, Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs, Intestin Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs, Dropsies, and Asthma's, and Joint-racking Rheums. Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch; And over them triumphant Death his Dart Shook, but delaid to strike, though oft invok't With vows, as thir chief good, and final hope. Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long Drie-ey'd behold? ADAM could not, but wept, Though not of Woman born; compassion quell'd His best of Man, and gave him up to tears A space, till firmer thoughts restraind excess, And scarce recovering words his plaint renew'd. O miserable Mankind, to what fall Degraded, to what wretched state reserv'd? Better end heer unborn. Why is life giv'n To be thus wrested from us? rather why Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew What we receive, would either not accept Life offer'd, or soon beg to lay it down, Glad to be so dismist in peace. Can thus Th' Image of God in man created once So goodly and erect, though faultie since, To such unsightly sufferings be debas't Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man, Retaining still Divine similitude In part, from such deformities be free, And for his Makers Image sake exempt? Thir Makers Image, answerd MICHAEL, then Forsook them, when themselves they villifi'd To serve ungovern'd appetite, and took His Image whom they serv'd, a brutish vice, Inductive mainly to the sin of EVE. Therefore so abject is thir punishment, Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but thir own, Or if his likeness, by themselves defac't While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules To loathsom sickness, worthily, since they Gods Image did not reverence in themselves. I yeild it just, said ADAM, and submit. But is there yet no other way, besides These painful passages, how we may come To Death, and mix with our connatural dust? There is, said MICHAEL, if thou well observe The rule of not too much, by temperance taught In what thou eatst and drinkst, seeking from thence Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight, Till many years over thy head return: So maist thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease Gatherd, not harshly pluckt, for death mature: This is old age; but then thou must outlive Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change To witherd weak & gray; thy Senses then Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgoe, To what thou hast, and for the Aire of youth Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reigne A melancholly damp of cold and dry To waigh thy spirits down, and last consume The Balme of Life. To whom our Ancestor. Henceforth I flie not Death, nor would prolong Life much, bent rather how I may be quit Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge, Which I must keep till my appointed day Of rendring up. MICHAEL to him repli'd. Nor love thy Life, nor hate; but what thou livst Live well, how long or short permit to Heav'n: And now prepare thee for another sight. He lookd and saw a spacious Plaine, whereon Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds Of Cattel grazing: others, whence the sound Of Instruments that made melodious chime Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moovd Thir stops and chords was seen: his volant touch Instinct through all proportions low and high Fled and pursu'd transverse the resonant fugue. In other part stood one who at the Forge Labouring, two massie clods of Iron and Brass Had melted whether found where casual fire Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale, Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot To som Caves mouth, or whether washt by stream From underground the liquid Ore he dreind Into fit moulds prepar'd; from which he formd First his own Tooles; then, what might else be wrought Fulfil or grav'n in mettle. After these, But on the hether side a different sort From the high neighbouring Hills, which was thir Seat, Down to the Plain descended: by thir guise Just men they seemd, and all thir study bent To worship God aright, and know his works Not hid, nor those things lost which might preserve Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain Long had not walkt, when from the Tents behold A Beavie of fair Women, richly gay In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on: The Men though grave, ey'd them, and let thir eyes Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net Fast caught, they lik'd, and each his liking chose; And now of love they treat till th' Eevning Star Loves Harbinger appeerd; then all in heat They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invok't; With Feast and Musick all the Tents resound. Such happy interview and fair event Of love & youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours, And charming Symphonies attach'd the heart Of ADAM, soon enclin'd to admit delight, The bent of Nature; which he thus express'd. True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest, Much better seems this Vision, and more hope Of peaceful dayes portends, then those two past; Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse, Here Nature seems fulfilld in all her ends. To whom thus MICHAEL. Judg not what is best By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet, Created, as thou art, to nobler end Holie and pure, conformitie divine. Those Tents thou sawst so pleasant, were the Tents Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race Who slew his Brother; studious they appere Of Arts that polish Life, Inventers rare, Unmindful of thir Maker, though his Spirit Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledg'd none. Yet they a beauteous ofspring shall beget; For that fair femal Troop thou sawst, that seemd Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay, Yet empty of all good wherein consists Womans domestic honour and chief praise; Bred onely and completed to the taste Of lustful apperence, to sing, to dance, To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roule the Eye. To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives Religious titl'd them the Sons of God, Shall yeild up all thir vertue, all thir fame Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy, Erelong to swim at larg and laugh; for which The world erelong a world of tears must weepe. To whom thus ADAM of short joy bereft. O pittie and shame, that they who to live well Enterd so faire, should turn aside to tread Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint! But still I see the tenor of Mans woe Holds on the same, from Woman to begin. From Mans effeminate slackness it begins, Said th' Angel, who should better hold his place By wisdome, and superiour gifts receavd. But now prepare thee for another Scene. He lookd and saw wide Territorie spred Before him, Towns, and rural works between, Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towrs, Concours in Arms, fierce Faces threatning Warr, Giants of mightie Bone, and bould emprise; Part wield thir Arms, part courb the foaming Steed, Single or in Array of Battel rang'd Both Horse and Foot, nor idely mustring stood; One way a Band select from forage drives A herd of Beeves, faire Oxen and faire Kine From a fat Meddow ground; or fleecy Flock, Ewes and thir bleating Lambs over the Plaine, Thir Bootie; scarce with Life the Shepherds flye, But call in aide, which tacks a bloody Fray; With cruel Tournament the Squadrons joine; Where Cattel pastur'd late, now scatterd lies With Carcasses and Arms th' ensanguind Field Deserted: Others to a Citie strong Lay Siege, encampt; by Batterie, Scale, and Mine, Assaulting; others from the Wall defend With Dart and Jav'lin, Stones and sulfurous Fire; On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds. In other part the scepter'd Haralds call To Council in the Citie Gates: anon Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriours mixt, Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon In factious opposition, till at last Of middle Age one rising, eminent In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong, And Judgement from above: him old and young Exploded, and had seiz'd with violent hands, Had not a Cloud descending snatch'd him thence Unseen amid the throng: so violence Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found. ADAM was all in tears, and to his guide Lamenting turnd full sad; O what are these, Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death Inhumanly to men, and multiply Ten thousand fould the sin of him who slew His Brother; for of whom such massacher Make they but of thir Brethren, men of men? But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heav'n Rescu'd, had in his Righteousness bin lost? To whom thus MICHAEL; These are the product Of those ill-mated Marriages thou saw'st; Where good with bad were matcht, who of themselves Abhor to joyn; and by imprudence mixt, Produce prodigious Births of bodie or mind. Such were these Giants, men of high renown; For in those dayes Might onely shall be admir'd, And Valour and Heroic Vertu call'd; To overcome in Battel, and subdue Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch Of human Glorie, and for Glorie done Of triumph, to be styl'd great Conquerours, Destroyers rightlier call'd and Plagues of men. Thus Fame shall be achiev'd, renown on Earth, And what most merits fame in silence hid. But hee the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst The onely righteous in a World perverse, And therefore hated, therefore so beset With Foes for daring single to be just, And utter odious Truth, that God would come To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High Rapt in a balmie Cloud with winged Steeds Did, as thou sawst, receave, to walk with God High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss, Exempt from Death; to shew thee what reward Awaits the good, the rest what punishment; Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold. He look'd, & saw the face of things quite chang'd; The brazen Throat of Warr had ceast to roar, All now was turn'd to jollitie and game, To luxurie and riot, feast and dance, Marrying or prostituting, as befell, Rape or Adulterie, where passing faire Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broiles. At length a Reverend Sire among them came, And of thir doings great dislike declar'd, And testifi'd against thir wayes; hee oft Frequented thir Assemblies, whereso met, Triumphs or Festivals, and to them preachd In prison under Judgements imminent: But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceas'd Contending, and remov'd his Tents farr off; Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall, Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk, Measur'd by Cubit, length, & breadth, and highth, Smeard round with Pitch, and in the side a dore Contriv'd, and of provisions laid in large For Man and Beast: when loe a wonder strange! Of everie Beast, and Bird, and Insect small Came seavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught Thir order; last the Sire, and his three Sons With thir four Wives, and God made fast the dore. Meanwhile the Southwind rose, & with black wings Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove From under Heav'n; the Hills to their supplie Vapour, and Exhalation dusk and moist, Sent up amain; and now the thick'nd Skie Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rush'd the Rain Impetuous, and continu'd till the Earth No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow Rode tilting o're the Waves, all dwellings else Flood overwhelmd, and them with all thir pomp Deep under water rould; Sea cover'd Sea, Sea without shoar; and in thir Palaces Where luxurie late reign'd, Sea-monsters whelp'd And stabl'd; of Mankind, so numerous late, All left, in one small bottom swum imbark't. How didst thou grieve then, ADAM, to behold The end of all thy Ofspring, end so sad, Depopulation; thee another Floud, Of tears and sorrow a Floud thee also drown'd, And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reard By th' Angel, on thy feet thou stoodst at last, Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns His Childern, all in view destroyd at once; And scarce to th' Angel utterdst thus thy plaint. O Visions ill foreseen! better had I Liv'd ignorant of future, so had borne My part of evil onely, each dayes lot Anough to bear; those now, that were dispenst The burd'n of many Ages, on me light At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth Abortive, to torment me ere thir being, With thought that they must be. Let no man seek Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall Him or his Childern, evil he may be sure, Which neither his foreknowing can prevent, And hee the future evil shall no less In apprehension then in substance feel Grievous to bear: but that care now is past, Man is not whom to warne: those few escap't Famin and anguish will at last consume Wandring that watrie Desert: I had hope When violence was ceas't, and Warr on Earth, All would have then gon well, peace would have crownd With length of happy days the race of man; But I was farr deceav'd; for now I see Peace to corrupt no less then Warr to waste. How comes it thus? unfould, Celestial Guide, And whether here the Race of man will end. To whom thus MICHAEL. Those whom last thou sawst In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they First seen in acts of prowess eminent And great exploits, but of true vertu void; Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste Subduing Nations, and achievd thereby Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey, Shall change thir course to pleasure, ease, and sloth, Surfet, and lust, till wantonness and pride Raise out of friendship hostil deeds in Peace. The conquerd also, and enslav'd by Warr Shall with thir freedom lost all vertu loose And feare of God, from whom thir pietie feign'd In sharp contest of Battel found no aide Against invaders; therefore coold in zeale Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure, Worldlie or dissolute, on what thir Lords Shall leave them to enjoy; for th' Earth shall bear More then anough, that temperance may be tri'd: So all shall turn degenerate, all deprav'd, Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot; One Man except, the onely Son of light In a dark Age, against example good, Against allurement, custom, and a World Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn, Or violence, hee of thir wicked wayes Shall them admonish, and before them set The paths of righteousness, how much more safe, And full of peace, denouncing wrauth to come On thir impenitence; and shall returne Of them derided, but of God observd The one just Man alive; by his command Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou beheldst, To save himself and houshold from amidst A World devote to universal rack. No sooner hee with them of Man and Beast Select for life shall in the Ark be lodg'd, And shelterd round, but all the Cataracts Of Heav'n set open on the Earth shall powre Raine day and night, all fountaines of the Deep Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount Of Paradise by might of Waves be moovd Out of his place, pushd by the horned floud, With all his verdure spoil'd, and Trees adrift Down the great River to the op'ning Gulf, And there take root an Iland salt and bare, The haunt of Seales and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang. To teach thee that God attributes to place No sanctitie, if none be thither brought By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell. And now what further shall ensue, behold. He lookd, and saw the Ark hull on the floud, Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled, Drivn by a keen North-winde, that blowing drie Wrinkl'd the face of Deluge, as decai'd; And the cleer Sun on his wide watrie Glass Gaz'd hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew, As after thirst, which made thir flowing shrink From standing lake to tripping ebbe, that stole With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopt His Sluces, as the Heav'n his windows shut. The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground Fast on the top of som high mountain fixt. And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appeer; With clamor thence the rapid Currents drive Towards the retreating Sea thir furious tyde. Forthwith from out the Arke a Raven flies, And after him, the surer messenger, A Dove sent forth once and agen to spie Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light; The second time returning, in his Bill An Olive leafe he brings, pacific signe: Anon drie ground appeers, and from his Arke The ancient Sire descends with all his Train; Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout, Grateful to Heav'n, over his head beholds A dewie Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay, Betok'ning peace from God, and Cov'nant new. Whereat the heart of ADAM erst so sad Greatly rejoyc'd, and thus his joy broke forth. O thou that future things canst represent As present, Heav'nly instructer, I revive At this last sight, assur'd that Man shall live With all the Creatures, and thir seed preserve. Farr less I now lament for one whole World Of wicked Sons destroyd, then I rejoyce For one Man found so perfet and so just, That God voutsafes to raise another World From him, and all his anger to forget. But say, what mean those colourd streaks in Heavn, Distended as the Brow of God appeas'd, Or serve they as a flourie verge to binde The fluid skirts of that same watrie Cloud, Least it again dissolve and showr the Earth? To whom th' Archangel. Dextrously thou aim'st; So willingly doth God remit his Ire, Though late repenting him of Man deprav'd, Griev'd at his heart, when looking down he saw The whole Earth fill'd with violence, and all flesh Corrupting each thir way; yet those remoov'd, Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight, That he relents, not to blot out mankind, And makes a Covenant never to destroy The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set His triple-colour'd Bow, whereon to look And call to mind his Cov'nant: Day and Night, Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost Shall hold thir course, till fire purge all things new, Both Heav'n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell. Thus thou hast seen one World begin and end; And Man as from a second stock proceed. Much thou hast yet to see, but I perceave Thy mortal sight to faile; objects divine Must needs impaire and wearie human sense: Henceforth what is to com I will relate, Thou therefore give due audience, and attend. This second sours of Men, while yet but few, And while the dread of judgement past remains Fresh in thir mindes, fearing the Deitie, With some regard to what is just and right Shall lead thir lives, and multiplie apace, Labouring the soile, and reaping plenteous crop, Corn wine and oyle; and from the herd or flock, Oft sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid, With large Wine-offerings pour'd, and sacred Feast Shal spend thir dayes in joy unblam'd, and dwell Long time in peace by Families and Tribes Under paternal rule; till one shall rise Of proud ambitious heart, who not content With fair equalitie, fraternal state, Will arrogate Dominion undeserv'd Over his brethren, and quite dispossess Concord and law of Nature from the Earth; Hunting and Men not Beasts shall be his game With Warr and hostile snare such as refuse Subjection to his Empire tyrannous: A mightie Hunter thence he shall be styl'd Before the Lord, as in despite of Heav'n, Or from Heav'n claming second Sovrantie; And from Rebellion shall derive his name, Though of Rebellion others he accuse. Hee with a crew, whom like Ambition joyns With him or under him to tyrannize, Marching from EDEN towards the West, shall finde The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge Boiles out from under ground, the mouth of Hell; Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast to build A Citie & Towre, whose top may reach to Heav'n; And get themselves a name, least far disperst In foraign Lands thir memorie be lost, Regardless whether good or evil fame. But God who oft descends to visit men Unseen, and through thir habitations walks To mark thir doings, them beholding soon, Comes down to see thir Citie, ere the Tower Obstruct Heav'n Towrs, and in derision sets Upon thir Tongues a various Spirit to rase Quite out thir Native Language, and instead To sow a jangling noise of words unknown: Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud Among the Builders; each to other calls Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage, As mockt they storm; great laughter was in Heav'n And looking down, to see the hubbub strange And hear the din; thus was the building left Ridiculous, and the work Confusion nam'd. Whereto thus ADAM fatherly displeas'd. O execrable Son so to aspire Above his Brethren, to himself affirming Authoritie usurpt, from God not giv'n: He gave us onely over Beast, Fish, Fowl Dominion absolute; that right we hold By his donation; but Man over men He made not Lord; such title to himself Reserving, human left from human free. But this Usurper his encroachment proud Stayes not on Man; to God his Tower intends Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food Will he convey up thither to sustain Himself and his rash Armie, where thin Aire Above the Clouds will pine his entrails gross, And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread? To whom thus MICHAEL. Justly thou abhorr'st That Son, who on the quiet state of men Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue Rational Libertie; yet know withall, Since thy original lapse, true Libertie Is lost, which alwayes with right Reason dwells Twinn'd, and from her hath no dividual being: Reason in man obscur'd, or not obeyd, Immediately inordinate desires And upstart Passions catch the Government From Reason, and to servitude reduce Man till then free. Therefore since hee permits Within himself unworthie Powers to reign Over free Reason, God in Judgement just Subjects him from without to violent Lords; Who oft as undeservedly enthrall His outward freedom: Tyrannie must be, Though to the Tyrant thereby no excuse. Yet somtimes Nations will decline so low From vertue, which is reason, that no wrong, But Justice, and some fatal curse annext Deprives them of thir outward libertie, Thir inward lost: Witness th' irreverent Son Of him who built the Ark, who for the shame Don to his Father, heard this heavie curse, SERVANT OF SERVANTS, on his vitious Race. Thus will this latter, as the former World, Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw His presence from among them, and avert His holy Eyes; resolving from thenceforth To leave them to thir own polluted wayes; And one peculiar Nation to select From all the rest, of whom to be invok'd, A Nation from one faithful man to spring: Him on this side EUPHRATES yet residing, Bred up in Idol-worship; O that men Canst thou believe? should be so stupid grown, While yet the Patriark liv'd, who scap'd the Flood, As to forsake the living God, and fall To-worship thir own work in Wood and Stone For Gods! yet him God the most High voutsafes To call by Vision from his Fathers house, His kindred and false Gods, into a Land Which he will shew him, and from him will raise A mightie Nation, and upon him showre His benediction so, that in his Seed All Nations shall be blest; hee straight obeys, Not knowing to what Land, yet firm believes: I see him, but thou canst not, with what Faith He leaves his Gods, his Friends, and native Soile UR of CHALDAEA, passing now the Ford To HARAN, after him a cumbrous Train Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous servitude; Not wandring poor, but trusting all his wealth With God, who call'd him, in a land unknown. CANAAN he now attains, I see his Tents Pitcht about SECHEM, and the neighbouring Plaine Of MOREB; there by promise he receaves Gift to his Progenie of all that Land; From HAMATH Northward to the Desert South Things by thir names I call, though yet unnam'd From HERMON East to the great Western Sea, Mount HERMON, yonder Sea, each place behold In prospect, as I point them; on the shoare Mount CARMEL; here the double-founted stream JORDAN, true limit Eastward; but his Sons Shall dwell to SENIR, that long ridge of Hills. This ponder, that all Nations of the Earth Shall in his Seed be blessed; by that Seed Is meant thy great deliverer, who shall bruise The Serpents head; whereof to thee anon Plainlier shall be reveald. This Patriarch blest, Whom FAITHFUL ABRAHAM due time shall call, A Son, and of his Son a Grand-childe leaves, Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown; The Grandchilde with twelve Sons increast, departs From CANAAN, to a Land hereafter call'd See where it flows, disgorging at seaven mouthes Into the Sea: to sojourn in that Land He comes invited by a yonger Son In time of dearth, a Son whose worthy deeds Raise him to be the second in that Realme Of PHARAO: there he dies, and leaves his Race Growing into a Nation, and now grown Suspected to a sequent King, who seeks To stop thir overgrowth, as inmate guests Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves Inhospitably, and kills thir infant Males: Till by two brethren those two brethren call MOSES and AARON sent from God to claime His people from enthralment, they return With glory and spoile back to thir promis'd Land. But first the lawless Tyrant, who denies To know thir God, or message to regard, Must be compelld by Signes and Judgements dire; To blood unshed the Rivers must be turnd, Frogs, Lice and Flies must all his Palace fill With loath'd intrusion, and fill all the land; His Cattel must of Rot and Murren die, Botches and blaines must all his flesh imboss, And all his people; Thunder mixt with Haile, And wheel on th' Earth, devouring where it rouls; What it devours not, Herb, or Fruit, or Graine, A darksom Cloud of Locusts swarming down Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green: Darkness must overshadow all his bounds, Palpable darkness, and blot out three dayes; Last with one midnight stroke all the first-born This River-dragon tam'd at length submits To let his sojourners depart, and oft Humbles his stubborn heart, but still as Ice More hard'nd after thaw, till in his rage Pursuing whom he late dismissd, the Sea Swallows him with his Host, but them lets pass As on drie land between two christal walls, Aw'd by the rod of MOSES so to stand Divided, till his rescu'd gain thir shoar: Such wondrous power God to his Saint will lend, Though present in his Angel, who shall goe Before them in a Cloud, and Pillar of Fire, To guide them in thir journey, and remove Behinde them, while th' obdurat King pursues: All night he will pursue, but his approach Darkness defends between till morning Watch; Then through the Firey Pillar and the Cloud God looking forth will trouble all his Host And craze thir Chariot wheels: when by command MOSES once more his potent Rod extends Over the Sea; the Sea his Rod obeys; On thir imbattelld ranks the Waves return, And overwhelm thir Warr: the Race elect Safe towards CANAAN from the shoar advance Through the wilde Desert, not the readiest way, Least entring on the CANAANITE allarmd Warr terrifie them inexpert, and feare Inglorious life with servitude; for life To noble and ignoble is more sweet Untraind in Armes, where rashness leads not on. This also shall they gain by thir delay In the wide Wilderness, there they shall found Thir government, and thir great Senate choose Through the twelve Tribes, to rule by Laws ordaind: God from the Mount of SINAI, whose gray top Shall tremble, he descending, will himself In Thunder Lightning and loud Trumpets sound Ordaine them Lawes; part such as appertaine To civil Justice, part religious Rites Of sacrifice, informing them, by types And shadowes, of that destind Seed to bruise The Serpent, by what meanes he shall achieve Mankinds deliverance. But the voice of God To mortal eare is dreadful; they beseech That MOSES might report to them his will, And terror cease; he grants them thir desire, Instructed that to God is no access Without Mediator, whose high Office now MOSES in figure beares, to introduce One greater, of whose day he shall foretell, And all the Prophets in thir Age the times Of great MESSIAH shall sing. Thus Laws and Rites Establisht, such delight hath God in Men Obedient to his will, that he voutsafes Among them to set up his Tabernacle, The holy One with mortal Men to dwell: By his prescript a Sanctuary is fram'd Of Cedar, overlaid with Gold, therein The Records of his Cov'nant, over these A Mercie-seat of Gold between the wings Of two bright Cherubim, before him burn Seaven Lamps as in a Zodiac representing The Heav'nly fires; over the Tent a Cloud Shall rest by Day, a fierie gleame by Night, Save when they journie, and at length they come, Promisd to ABRAHAM and his Seed: the rest Were long to tell, how many Battels fought, How many Kings destroyd, and Kingdoms won, Or how the Sun shall in mid Heav'n stand still A day entire, and Nights due course adjourne, Mans voice commanding, Sun in GIBEON stand, And thou Moon in the vale of AIALON, Till ISRAEL overcome; so call the third From ABRAHAM, Son of ISAAC, and from him His whole descent, who thus shall CANAAN win. Here ADAM interpos'd. O sent from Heav'n, Enlightner of my darkness, gracious things Thou hast reveald, those chiefly which concerne Just ABRAHAM and his Seed: now first I finde Mine eyes true op'ning, and my heart much eas'd, Erwhile perplext with thoughts what would becom His day, in whom all Nations shall be blest, Favour unmerited by me, who sought Forbidd'n knowledge by forbidd'n means. This yet I apprehend not, why to those Among whom God will deigne to dwell on Earth So many and so various Laws are giv'n; So many Laws argue so many sins Among them; how can God with such reside? To whom thus MICHAEL. Doubt not but that sin Will reign among them, as of thee begot; And therefore was Law given them to evince Thir natural pravitie, by stirring up Sin against Law to fight; that when they see Law can discover sin, but not remove, Save by those shadowie expiations weak, The bloud of Bulls and Goats, they may conclude Some bloud more precious must be paid for Man, Just for unjust, that in such righteousness To them by Faith imputed, they may finde Justification towards God, and peace Of Conscience, which the Law by Ceremonies Cannot appease, nor Man the moral part Perform, and not performing cannot live. So Law appears imperfet, and but giv'n With purpose to resign them in full time Up to a better Cov'nant, disciplin'd From shadowie Types to Truth, from Flesh to Spirit, From imposition of strict Laws, to free Acceptance of large Grace, from servil fear To filial, works of Law to works of Faith. And therefore shall not MOSES, though of God Highly belov'd, being but the Minister Of Law, his people into CANAAN lead; But JOSHUA whom the Gentiles JESUS call, His Name and Office bearing, who shall quell The adversarie Serpent, and bring back Through the worlds wilderness long wanderd man Safe to eternal Paradise of rest. Meanwhile they in thir earthly CANAAN plac't Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins National interrupt thir public peace, Provoking God to raise them enemies: From whom as oft he saves them penitent By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom The second, both for pietie renownd And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive Irrevocable, that his Regal Throne For ever shall endure; the like shall sing Of DAVID so I name this King shall rise A Son, the Womans Seed to thee foretold, Foretold to ABRAHAM, as in whom shall trust All Nations, and to Kings foretold, of Kings The last, for of his Reign shall be no end. But first a long succession must ensue, And his next Son for Wealth and Wisdom fam'd, The clouded Ark of God till then in Tents Wandring, shall in a glorious Temple enshrine. Such follow him, as shall be registerd Part good, part bad, of bad the longer scrowle, Whose foul Idolatries, and other faults Heapt to the popular summe, will so incense God, as to leave them, and expose thir Land, Thir Citie, his Temple, and his holy Ark With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey To that proud Citie, whose high Walls thou saw'st Left in confusion, BABYLON thence call'd. There in captivitie he lets them dwell The space of seventie years, then brings them back, Remembring mercie, and his Cov'nant sworn To DAVID, stablisht as the dayes of Heav'n. Returnd from BABYLON by leave of Kings Thir Lords, whom God dispos'd, the house of God They first re-edifie, and for a while In mean estate live moderate, till grown In wealth and multitude, factious they grow; But first among the Priests dissension springs, Men who attend the Altar, and should most Endeavour Peace: thir strife pollution brings Upon the Temple it self: at last they seise The Scepter, and regard not DAVIDS Sons, Then loose it to a stranger, that the true Anointed King MESSIAH might be born Barr'd of his right; yet at his Birth a Starr Unseen before in Heav'n proclaims him com, And guides the Eastern Sages, who enquire His place, to offer Incense, Myrrh, and Gold; His place of birth a solemn Angel tells To simple Shepherds, keeping watch by night; They gladly thither haste, and by a Quire Of squadrond Angels hear his Carol sung. The Power of the most High; he shall ascend The Throne hereditarie, and bound his Reign With earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heav'ns. He ceas'd, discerning ADAM with such joy Surcharg'd, as had like grief bin dew'd in tears, Without the vent of words, which these he breathd. O Prophet of glad tidings, finisher Of utmost hope! now clear I understand What oft my steddiest thoughts have searcht in vain, Why our great expectation should be call'd The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, Haile, High in the love of Heav'n, yet from my Loynes Thou shalt proceed, and from thy Womb the Son Of God most High; So God with man unites. Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise Expect with mortal paine: say where and when Thir fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victors heel. To whom thus MICHAEL. Dream not of thir fight, As of a Duel, or the local wounds Of head or heel: not therefore joynes the Son Manhood to God-head, with more strength to foil Thy enemie; nor so is overcome SATAN, whose fall from Heav'n, a deadlier bruise, Disabl'd not to give thee thy deaths wound: Which hee, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure, Not by destroying SATAN, but his works In thee and in thy Seed: nor can this be, But by fulfilling that which thou didst want, Obedience to the Law of God, impos'd On penaltie of death, and suffering death, The penaltie to thy transgression due, And due to theirs which out of thine will grow: So onely can high Justice rest appaid. The Law of God exact he shall fulfill Both by obedience and by love, though love Alone fulfill the Law; thy punishment He shall endure by coming in the Flesh To a reproachful life and cursed death, Proclaiming Life to all who shall believe In his redemption, and that his obedience Imputed becomes theirs by Faith, his merits To save them, not thir own, though legal works. For this he shall live hated, be blasphem'd, Seis'd on by force, judg'd, and to death condemnd A shameful and accurst, naild to the Cross By his own Nation, slaine for bringing Life; But to the Cross he nailes thy Enemies, The Law that is against thee, and the sins Of all mankinde, with him there crucifi'd, Never to hurt them more who rightly trust In this his satisfaction; so he dies, But soon revives, Death over him no power Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light Returne, the Starres of Morn shall see him rise Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light, Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems, His death for Man, as many as offerd Life Neglect not, and the benefit imbrace By Faith not void of works: this God-like act Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldst have dy'd, In sin for ever lost from life; this act Shall bruise the head of SATAN, crush his strength Defeating Sin and Death, his two maine armes, And fix farr deeper in his head thir stings Then temporal death shall bruise the Victors heel, Or theirs whom he redeems, a death like sleep, A gentle wafting to immortal Life. Nor after resurrection shall he stay Longer on Earth then certaine times to appeer Still follow'd him; to them shall leave in charge To teach all nations what of him they learn'd And his Salvation, them who shall beleeve Baptizing in the profluent streame, the signe Of washing them from guilt of sin to Life Pure, and in mind prepar'd, if so befall, For death, like that which the redeemer dy'd. All Nations they shall teach; for from that day Not onely to the Sons of ABRAHAMS Loines Salvation shall be Preacht, but to the Sons Of ABRAHAMS Faith wherever through the world; So in his seed all Nations shall be blest. Then to the Heav'n of Heav'ns he shall ascend With victory, triumphing through the aire Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise The Serpent, Prince of aire, and drag in Chaines Through all his realme, & there confounded leave; Then enter into glory, and resume His Seat at Gods right hand, exalted high Above all names in Heav'n; and thence shall come, When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe, With glory and power to judge both quick & dead, To judge th' unfaithful dead, but to reward His faithful, and receave them into bliss, Whether in Heav'n or Earth, for then the Earth Shall all be Paradise, far happier place Then this of EDEN, and far happier daies. So spake th' Archangel MICHAEL, then paus'd, As at the Worlds great period; and our Sire Replete with joy and wonder thus repli'd. O goodness infinite, goodness immense! That all this good of evil shall produce, And evil turn to good; more wonderful Then that which by creation first brought forth Light out of darkness! full of doubt I stand, Whether I should repent me now of sin By mee done and occasiond, or rejoyce Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring, To God more glory, more good will to Men From God, and over wrauth grace shall abound. But say, if our deliverer up to Heav'n Must reascend, what will betide the few His faithful, left among th' unfaithful herd, The enemies of truth; who then shall guide His people, who defend? will they not deale Wors with his followers then with him they dealt? Be sure they will, said th' Angel; but from Heav'n Hee to his own a Comforter will send, The promise of the Father, who shall dwell His Spirit within them, and the Law of Faith Working through love, upon thir hearts shall write, To guide them in all truth, and also arme With spiritual Armour, able to resist SATANS assaults, and quench his fierie darts What Man can do against them, not affraid, Though to the death, against such cruelties With inward consolations recompenc't, And oft supported so as shall amaze Thir proudest persecuters: for the Spirit Powrd first on his Apostles, whom he sends To evangelize the Nations, then on all Baptiz'd, shall them with wondrous gifts endue To speak all Tongues, and do all Miracles, As did thir Lord before them. Thus they win Great numbers of each Nation to receave With joy the tidings brought from Heav'n: at length Thir Ministry perform'd, and race well run, Thir doctrine and thir story written left, They die; but in thir room, as they forewarne, Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous Wolves, Who all the sacred mysteries of Heav'n To thir own vile advantages shall turne Of lucre and ambition, and the truth With superstitions and traditions taint, Left onely in those written Records pure, Though not but by the Spirit understood. Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names, Places and titles, and with these to joine Secular power, though feigning still to act By spiritual, to themselves appropriating The Spirit of God, promisd alike and giv'n To all Beleevers; and from that pretense, Spiritual Lawes by carnal power shall force On every conscience; Laws which none shall finde Left them inrould, or what the Spirit within Shall on the heart engrave. What will they then But force the Spirit of Grace it self, and binde His consort Libertie; what, but unbuild His living Temples, built by Faith to stand, Thir own Faith not anothers: for on Earth Who against Faith and Conscience can be heard Infallible? yet many will presume: Whence heavie persecution shall arise On all who in the worship persevere Of Spirit and Truth; the rest, farr greater part, Will deem in outward Rites and specious formes Religion satisfi'd; Truth shall retire Bestuck with slandrous darts, and works of Faith Rarely be found: so shall the World goe on, To good malignant, to bad men benigne, Under her own waight groaning, till the day Appeer of respiration to the just, And vengeance to the wicked, at return Of him so lately promis'd to thy aid, The Womans seed, obscurely then foretold, Now amplier known thy Saviour and thy Lord, Last in the Clouds from Heav'n to be reveald In glory of the Father, to dissolve SATAN with his perverted World, then raise From the conflagrant mass, purg'd and refin'd, New Heav'ns, new Earth, Ages of endless date Founded in righteousness and peace and love, To bring forth fruits Joy and eternal Bliss. He ended; and thus ADAM last reply'd. How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest, Measur'd this transient World, the Race of time, Till time stand fixt: beyond is all abyss, Eternitie, whose end no eye can reach. Greatly instructed I shall hence depart, Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill Of knowledge, what this vessel can containe; Beyond which was my folly to aspire. Henceforth I learne, that to obey is best, And love with feare the onely God, to walk As in his presence, ever to observe His providence, and on him sole depend, Merciful over all his works, with good Still overcoming evil, and by small Accomplishing great things, by things deemd weak Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise By simply meek; that suffering for Truths sake Is fortitude to highest victorie, And to the faithful Death the Gate of Life; Taught this by his example whom I now Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest. To whom thus also th' Angel last repli'd: This having learnt, thou hast attaind the summe Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the Starrs Thou knewst by name, and all th' ethereal Powers, All secrets of the deep, all Natures works, Or works of God in Heav'n, Air, Earth, or Sea, And all the riches of this World enjoydst, And all the rule, one Empire; onely add Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add Faith, By name to come call'd Charitie, the soul Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loath To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess A Paradise within thee, happier farr. Let us descend now therefore from this top Of Speculation; for the hour precise Exacts our parting hence; and see the Guards, By mee encampt on yonder Hill, expect Thir motion, at whose Front a flaming Sword, In signal of remove, waves fiercely round; We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve; Her also I with gentle Dreams have calm'd Portending good, and all her spirits compos'd To meek submission: thou at season fit Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard, Chiefly what may concern her Faith to know, The great deliverance by her Seed to come That ye may live, which will be many dayes, Both in one Faith unanimous though sad, With cause for evils past, yet much more cheer'd With meditation on the happie end. He ended, and they both descend the Hill; Descended, ADAM to the Bowre where EVE Lay sleeping ran before, but found her wak't; And thus with words not sad she him receav'd. Whence thou returnst, & whither wentst, I know; For God is also in sleep, and Dreams advise, Which he hath sent propitious, some great good Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress VVearied I fell asleep: but now lead on; In mee is no delay; with thee to goe, Is to stay here; without thee here to stay, Is to go hence unwilling; thou to mee Art all things under Heav'n, all places thou, VVho for my wilful crime art banisht hence. This further consolation yet secure I carry hence; though all by mee is lost, Such favour I unworthie am voutsaft, By mee the Promis'd Seed shall all restore. So spake our Mother EVE, and ADAM heard VVell pleas'd, but answer'd not; for now too nigh Th' Archangel stood, and from the other Hill To thir fixt Station, all in bright array The Cherubim descended; on the ground Gliding meteorous, as Ev'ning Mist Ris'n from a River o're the marish glides, And gathers ground fast at the Labourers heel Homeward returning. High in Front advanc't, The brandisht Sword of God before them blaz'd Fierce as a Comet; which with torrid heat, And vapour as the LIBYAN Air adust, Began to parch that temperate Clime; whereat In either hand the hastning Angel caught Our lingring Parents, and to th' Eastern Gate Let them direct, and down the Cliff as fast To the subjected Plaine; then disappeer'd. They looking back, all th' Eastern side beheld Of Paradise, so late thir happie seat, Wav'd over by that flaming Brand, the Gate With dreadful Faces throng'd and fierie Armes: Som natural tears they drop'd, but wip'd them soon; The World was all before them, where to choose Thir place of rest, and Providence thir guide: They hand in hand with wandring steps and slow, Through EDEN took thir solitarie way. <|endofpoem|> I, WHO erewhile the happy Garden sung By one man's disobedience lost, now sing Recovered Paradise to all mankind, By one man's firm obedience fully tried Through all temptation, and the Tempter foiled In all his wiles, defeated and repulsed, And Eden raised in the waste Wilderness. Thou Spirit, who led'st this glorious Eremite Into the desert, his victorious field Against the spiritual foe, and brought'st him thence By proof the undoubted Son of God, inspire, As thou art wont, my prompted song, else mute, And bear through highth or depth of Nature's bounds, With prosperous wing full summed, to tell of deeds Above heroic, though in secret done, And unrecorded left through many an age: Worthy to have not remained so long unsung. Now had the great Proclaimer, with a voice More awful than the sound of trumpet, cried Repentance, and Heaven's kingdom nigh at hand To all baptized. To his great baptism flocked With awe the regions round, and with them came From Nazareth the son of Joseph deemed To the flood Jordan came as then obscure, Unmarked, unknown. But him the Baptist soon Descried, divinely warned, and witness bore As to his worthier, and would have resigned To him his heavenly office. Nor was long His witness unconfirmed: on him baptized Heaven opened, and in likeness of a Dove The Spirit descended, while the Father's voice From Heaven pronounced him his beloved Son. That heard the Adversary, who, roving still About the world, at that assembly famed Would not be last, and, with the voice divine Nigh thunder-struck, the exalted man to whom Such high attest was given a while surveyed With wonder; then, with envy fraught and rage, Flies to his place, nor rests, but in mid air To council summons all his mighty Peers, Within thick clouds and dark tenfold involved, A gloomy consistory; and them amidst, With looks aghast and sad, he thus bespake: O ancient Powers of Air and this wide World For much more willingly I mention Air, This our old conquest, than remember Hell, Our hated habitation , well ye know How many ages, as the years of men, This Universe we have possessed, and ruled In manner at our will the affairs of Earth, Since Adam and his facile consort Eve Lost Paradise, deceived by me, though since With dread attending when that fatal wound Shall be inflicted by the seed of Eve Upon my head. Long the decrees of Heaven Delay, for longest time to Him is short; And now, too soon for us, the circling hours This dreaded time have compassed, wherein we Must bide the stroke of that long-threatened wound At least, if so we can, and by the head Broken be not intended all our power To be infringed, our freedom and our being In this fair empire won of Earth and Air For this ill news I bring: The Woman's Seed, Destined to this, is late of woman born. His birth to our just fear gave no small cause; But his growth now to youth's full flower, displaying All virtue, grace and wisdom to achieve Things highest, greatest, multiplies my fear. Before him a great Prophet, to proclaim His coming, is sent harbinger, who all Invites, and in the consecrated stream Pretends to wash off sin, and fit them so Purified to receive him pure, or rather To do him honour as their King. All come, And he himself among them was baptized Not thence to be more pure, but to receive The testimony of Heaven, that who he is Thenceforth the nations may not doubt. I saw The Prophet do him reverence; on him, rising Out of the water, Heaven above the clouds Unfold her crystal doors; thence on his head A perfet Dove descend whate'er it meant ; And out of Heaven the sovraign voice I heard, 'This is my Son beloved, in him am pleased.' His mother, than, is mortal, but his Sire He who obtains the monarchy of Heaven; And what will He not do to advance his Son? His first-begot we know, and sore have felt, When his fierce thunder drove us to the Deep; Who this is we must learn, for Man he seems In all his lineaments, though in his face The glimpses of his Father's glory shine. Ye see our danger on the utmost edge Of hazard, which admits no long debate, But must with something sudden be opposed Not force, but well-couched fraud, well-woven snares , Ere in the head of nations he appear, Their king, their leader, and supreme on Earth. I, when no other durst, sole undertook The dismal expedition to find out And ruin Adam, and the exploit performed Successfully: a calmer voyage now Will waft me; and the way found prosperous once Induces best to hope of like success. He ended, and his words impression left Of much amazement to the infernal crew, Distracted and surprised with deep dismay At these sad tidings. But no time was then For long indulgence to their fears or grief: Unanimous they all commit the care And management of this man enterprise To him, their great Dictator, whose attempt At first against mankind so well had thrived In Adam's overthrow, and led their march From Hell's deep-vaulted den to dwell in light, Regents, and potentates, and kings, yea gods, Of many a pleasant realm and province wide. So to the coast of Jordan he directs His easy steps, girded with snaky wiles, Where he might likeliest find this new-declared, This man of men, attested Son of God, Temptation and all guile on him to try So to subvert whom he suspected raised To end his reign on Earth so long enjoyed: But, contrary, unweeting he fulfilled The purposed counsel, pre-ordained and fixed, Of the Most High, who, in full frequence bright Of Angels, thus to Gabriel smiling spake: Gabriel, this day, by proof, thou shalt behold, Thou and all Angels conversant on Earth With Man or men's affairs, how I begin To verify that solemn message late, On which I sent thee to the Virgin pure In Galilee, that she should bear a son, Great in renown, and called the Son of God. Then told'st her, doubting how these things could be To her a virgin, that on her should come The Holy Ghost, and the power of the Highest O'ershadow her. This Man, born and now upgrown, To shew him worthy of his birth divine And high prediction, henceforth I expose To Satan; let him tempt, and now assay His utmost subtlety, because he boasts And vaunts of his great cunning to the throng Of his Apostasy. He might have learnt Less overweening, since he failed in Job, Whose constant perseverance overcame Whate'er his cruel malice could invent. He now shall know I can produce a man, Of female seed, far abler to resist All his solicitations, and at length All his vast force, and drive him back to Hell Winning by conquest what the first man lost By fallacy surprised. But first I mean To exercise him in the Wilderness; There he shall first lay down the rudiments Of his great warfare, ere I send him forth To conquer Sin and Death, the two grand foes. By humiliation and strong sufferance His weakness shall o'ercome Satanic strength, And all the world, and mass of sinful flesh; That all the Angels and aethereal Powers They now, and men hereafter may discern From what consummate virtue I have chose This perfet man, by merit called my Son, To earn salvation for the sons of men. So spake the Eternal Father, and all Heaven Admiring stood a space; then into hymns Burst forth, and in celestial measures moved, Circling the throne and singing, while the hand Sung with the voice, and this the argument: Victory and triumph to the Son of God, Now entering his great duel, not of arms, But to vanquish by wisdom hellish wiles! The Father knows the Son; therefore secure Ventures his filial virtue, though untried, Against whate'er may tempt, whate'er seduce, Allure, or terrify, or undermine. Be frustrate, all ye stratagems of Hell, And, devilish machinations, come to nought! So they in Heaven their odes and vigils tuned. Meanwhile the Son of God, who yet some days Lodged in Bethabara, where John baptized, Musing and much revolving in his breast How best the mighty work he might begin Of Saviour to mankind, and which way first Publish his godlike office now mature, One day forth walked alone, the Spirit leading And his deep thoughts, the better to converse With solitude, till, far from track of men, Thought following thought, and step by step led on, He entered now the bordering Desert wild, And, with dark shades and rocks environed round, His holy meditations thus pursued: O what a multitude of thoughts at once Awakened in me swarm, while I consider What from within I feel myself, and hear What from without comes often to my ears, Ill sorting with my present state compared! When I was yet a child, no childish play To me was pleasing; all my mind was set Serious to learn and know, and thence to do, What might be public good; myself I thought Born to that end, born to promote all truth, All righteous things. Therefore, above my years, The Law of God I read, and found it sweet; Made it my whole delight, and in it grew To such perfection that, ere yet my age Had measured twice six years, at our great Feast I went into the Temple, there to hear The teachers of our Law, and to propose What might improve my knowledge or their own, And was admired by all. Yet this not all To which my spirit aspired. Victorious deeds Flamed in my heart, heroic acts one while To rescue Israel from the Roman yoke; Then to subdue and quell, o'er all the earth, Brute violence and proud tyrannic power, Till truth were freed, and equity restored: Yet held it more humane, more heavenly, first By winning words to conquer willing hearts, And make persuasion do the work of fear; At least to try, and teach the erring soul, Not wilfully misdoing, but unware Misled; the stubborn only to subdue. These growing thoughts my mother soon perceiving, By words at times cast forth, inly rejoiced, And said to me apart, 'High are thy thoughts, O Son! but nourish them, and let them soar To what highth sacred virtue and true worth Can raise them, though above example high; By matchless deeds express thy matchless Sire. For know, thou art no son of mortal man; Though men esteem thee low of parentage, Thy Father is the Eternal King who rules All Heaven and Earth, Angels and sons of men. A messenger from God foretold thy birth Conceived in me a virgin; he foretold Thou shouldst be great, and sit on David's throne, And of thy kingdom there should be no end. At thy nativity a glorious quire Of Angels, in the fields of Bethlehem, sung To shepherds, watching at their folds by night, And told them the Messiah now was born, Where they might see him; and to thee they came, Directed to the manger where thou lay'st; For in the inn was left no better room. A Star, not seen before, in heaven appearing, Guided the Wise Men thither from the East, To honour thee with incense, myrrh, and gold; By whose bright course led on they found the place, Affirming it thy star, new-graven in heaven, By which they knew thee King of Israel born. Just Simeon and prophetic Anna, warned By vision, found thee in the Temple, and spake, Before the altar and the vested priest, Like things of thee to all that present stood.' This having heart, straight I again revolved The Law and Prophets, searching what was writ Concerning the Messiah, to our scribes Known partly, and soon found of whom they spake I am this chiefly, that my way must lie Through many a hard assay, even to the death, Ere I the promised kingdom can attain, Or work redemption for mankind, whose sins' Full weight must be transferred upon my head. Yet, neither thus disheartened or dismayed, The time prefixed I waited; when behold The Baptist of whose birth I oft had heard, Not knew by sight now come, who was to come Before Messiah, and his way prepare! I, as all others, to his baptism came, Which I believed was from above; but he Straight knew me, and with loudest voice proclaimed Me him for it was shewn him so from Heaven Me him whose harbinger he was; and first Refused on me his baptism to confer, As much his greater, and was hardly won. But, as I rose out of the laving stream, Heaven opened her eternal doors, from whence The Spirit descended on me like a Dove; And last, the sum of all, my Father's voice, Audibly heard from Heaven, pronounced me his, Me his beloved Son, in whom alone He was well pleased: by which I knew the time Now full, that I no more should live obscure, But openly begin, as best becomes The authority which I derived from Heaven. And now by some strong motion I am led Into this wilderness; to what intent I learn not yet. Perhaps I need not know; For what concerns my knowledge God reveals. So spake our Morning Star, then in his rise, And, looking round, on every side beheld A pathless desert, dusk with horrid shades. The way he came, not having marked return, Was difficult, by human steps untrod; And he still on was led, but with such thoughts Accompanied of things past and to come Lodged in his breast as well might recommend Such solitude before choicest society. Full forty days he passed whether on hill Sometimes, anon in shady vale, each night Under the covert of some ancient oak Or cedar to defend him from the dew, Or harboured in one cave, is not revealed; Nor tasted human food, nor hunger felt, Till those days ended; hungered then at last Among wild beasts. They at his sight grew mild, Nor sleeping him nor waking harmed; his walk The fiery serpent fled and noxious worm; The lion and fierce tiger glared aloof. But now an aged man in rural weeds, Following, as seemed, the quest of some stray eye, Or withered sticks to gather, which might serve Against a winter's day, when winds blow keen, To warm him wet returned from field at eve, He saw approach; who first with curious eye Perused him, then with words thus uttered spake: Sir, what ill chance hath brought thee to this place, So far from path or road of men, who pass In troop or caravan? for single none Durst ever, who returned, and dropt not here His carcass, pined with hunger and with droughth. I ask the rather, and the more admire, For that to me thou seem'st the man whom late Our new baptizing Prophet at the ford Of Jordan honoured so, and called thee Son Of God. I saw and heard, for we sometimes Who dwell this wild, constrained by want, come forth To town or village nigh nighest is far , Where aught we hear, and curious are to hear, What happens new; fame also finds us out. To whom the Son of God: Who brought me hither Will bring me hence; no other guide I seek. By miracle he may, replied the swain; What other way I see not; for we here Live on tough roots and stubs, to thirst inured More than the camel, and to drink go far Men to much misery and hardship born. But, if thou be the Son of God, command That out of these hard stones be made thee bread; So shalt thou save thyself, and us relieve With food, whereof we wretched seldom taste. He ended, and the Son of God replied: Think'st thou such force in bread? Is it not written For I discern thee other than thou seem'st , Man lives not by bread only, but each word Proceeding from the mouth of God, who fed Our fathers here with manna? In the Mount Moses was forty days, nor eat nor drank; And forty days Eliah without food Wandered this barren waste; the same I now. Why dost thou, then, suggest to me distrust Knowing who I am, as I know who thou art? Whom thus answered the Arch-Fiend, now undisguised: 'Tis true, I am that Spirit unfortunate Who, leagued with millions more in rash revolt, Kept not my happy station, but was driven With them from bliss to the bottomless Deep Yet to that hideous place not so confined By rigour unconniving but that oft, Leaving my dolorous prison, I enjoy Large liberty to round this globe of Earth, Or range in the Air; nor from the Heaven of Heavens Hath he excluded my resort sometimes. I came, among the Sons of God, when he Gave up into my hands Uzzean Job, To prove him, and illustrate his high worth; And, when to all his Angels he proposed To draw the proud king Ahab into fraud, That he might fall in Ramoth, they demurring, I undertook that office, and the tongues Of all his flattering prophets glibbed with lies To his destruction, as I had in charge: For what he bids I do. Though I have lost Much lustre of my native brightness, lost To be beloved of God, I have not lost To love, at least contemplate and admire, What I see excellent in good, or fair, Or virtuous; I should so have lost all sense. What can be then less in me than desire To see thee and approach thee, whom I know Declared the Son of God, to hear attent Thy wisdom, and behold thy godlike deeds? Men generally think me much a foe To all mankind. Why should I? they to me Never did wrong or violence. By them I lost not what I lost; rather by them I gained what I have gained, and with them dwell Copartner in these regions of the World, If not disposer lend them oft my aid, Oft my advice by presages and signs, And answers, oracles, portents, and dreams, Whereby they may direct their future life. Envy, they say, excites me, thus to gain Companions of my misery and woe! At first it may be; but, long since with woe Nearer acquainted, now I feel by proof That fellowship in pain divides not smart, Nor lightens aught each man's peculiar load; Small consolation, then, were Man adjoined. This wounds me most what can it less? that Man, Man fallen, shall be restored, I never more. To whom our Saviour sternly thus replied: Deservedly thou griev'st, composed of lies From the beginning, and in lies wilt end, Who boast'st release from Hell, and leave to come Into the Heaven of Heavens. Thou com'st, indeed, As a poor miserable captive thrall Comes to the place where he before had sat Among the prime in splendour, now deposed, Ejected, emptied, gazed, unpitied, shunned, A spectacle of ruin, or of scorn, To all the host of Heaven. The happy place Imparts to thee no happiness, no joy Rather inflames thy torment, representing Lost bliss, to thee no more communicable; So never more in Hell than when in Heaven. But thou art serviceable to Heaven's King! Wilt thou impute to obedience what thy fear Extorts, or pleasure to do ill excites? What but thy malice moved thee to misdeem Of righteous Job, then cruelly to afflict him With all inflictions? but his patience won. The other service was thy chosen task, To be a liar in four hundred mouths; For lying is thy sustenance, thy food. Yet thou pretend'st to truth! all oracles By thee are given, and what confessed more true Among the nations? That hath been thy craft, By mixing somewhat true to vent more lies. But what have been thy answers? what but dark, Ambiguous, and with double sense deluding, Which they who asked have seldom understood, And, not well understood, as good not known? Who ever, by consulting at thy shrine, Returned the wiser, or the more instruct To fly or follow what concerned him most, And run not sooner to his fatal snare? For God hath justly given the nations up To thy delusions; justly, since they fell Idolatrous. But, when his purpose is Among them to declare his providence, To thee not known, whence hast thou then thy truth, But from him, or his Angels president In every province, who, themselves disdaining To approach thy temples, give thee in command To thy adorers? Thou, with trembling fear, Or like a fawning parasite, obey'st; Then to thyself ascrib'st the truth foretold. But this thy glory shall be soon retrenched; No more shalt thou by oracling abuse The Gentiles; henceforth oracles are ceased, And thou no more with pomp and sacrifice Shalt be enquired at Delphos or elsewhere At least in vain, for they shall find thee mute. God hath now sent his living Oracle Into the world to teach his final will, And sends his Spirit of Truth henceforth to dwell In pious hearts, an inward oracle To all truth requisite for men to know. So spake our Saviour; but the subtle Fiend, Though inly stung with anger and disdain, Dissembled, and this answer smooth returned: Sharply thou hast insisted on rebuke, And urged me hard with doings which not will, But misery, hath wrested from me. Where Easily canst thou find one miserable, And not inforced oft-times to part from truth, If it may stand him more in stead to lie, Say and unsay, feign, flatter, or abjure? But thou art placed above me; thou art Lord; From thee I can, and must, submiss, endure Cheek or reproof, and glad to scape so quit. Hard are the ways of truth, and rough to walk, Smooth on the tongue discoursed, pleasing to the ear, And tunable as sylvan pipe or song; What wonder, then, if I delight to hear Her dictates from thy mouth? most men admire Virtue who follow not her lore. Permit me To hear thee when I come since no man comes , And talk at least, though I despair to attain. Thy Father, who is holy, wise, and pure, Suffers the hypocrite or atheous priest To tread his sacred courts, and minister About his altar, handling holy things, Praying or vowing, and voutsafed his voice To Balaam reprobate, a prophet yet Inspired: disdain not such access to me. To whom our Saviour, with unaltered brow: Thy coming hither, though I know thy scope, I bid not, or forbid. Do as thou find'st Permission from above; thou canst not more. He added not; and Satan, bowling low His gray dissimulation, disappeared, Into thin air diffused: for now began Night with her sullen wing to double-shade The desert; fowls in their clay nests were couched; And now wild beasts came forth the woods to roam. MEANWHILE the new-baptized, who yet remained At Jordan with the Baptist, and had seen Him whom they heard so late expressly called Jesus Messiah, Son of God, declared, And on that high authority had believed, And with him talked, and with him lodged I mean Andrew and Simon, famous after known, With others, though in Holy Writ not named Now missing him, their joy so lately found, So lately found and so abruptly gone, Began to doubt, and doubted many days, And, as the days increased, increased their doubt. Sometimes they thought he might be only shewn, And for a time caught up to God, as once Moses was in the Mount and missing long, And the great Thisbite, who on fiery wheels Rode up to Heaven, yet once again to come. Therefore, as those young prophets then with care Sought lost Eliah, so in each place these Nigh to Bethabara in Jericho The city of palms, AEnon, and Salem old, Machaerus, and each town or city walled On this side the broad lake Genezaret, Or in Peraea but returned in vain. Then on the bank of Jordan, by a creek, Where winds with reeds and osiers whispering play, Plain fishermen no greater men them call , Close in a cottage low together got, Their unexpected loss and plaints outbreathed: Alas, from what high hope to what relapse Unlooked for are we fallen! Our eyes beheld Messiah certainly now come, so long Expected of our fathers; we have heard His words, his wisdom full of grace and truth. 'Now, now, for sure, deliverance is at hand; The kingdom shall to Israel be restored:' Thus we rejoiced, but soon our joy is turned Into perplexity and new amaze. For whither is he gone? what accident Hath rapt him from us? will he now retire After appearance, and again prolong Our expectation? God of Israel, Send thy Messiah forth; the time is come. Behold the kings of the earth, how they oppress Thy Chosen, to what highth their power unjust They have exalted, and behind them cast All fear of Thee; arise, and vindicate Thy glory; free thy people from their yoke! But let us wait; thus far He hath performed Sent his Anointed, and to us revealed him By his great Prophet pointed at and shown In public, and with him we have conversed. Let us be glad of this, and all our fears Lay on his providence; He will not fail, Nor will withdraw him now, nor will recall Mock us with his blest sight, then snatch him hence: Soon we shall see our hope, our joy, return. Thus they out of their plaints new hope resume To find whom at the first they found unsought. But to his mother Mary, when she saw Others returned from baptism, not her Son, Nor left at Jordan tidings of him none, Within her breast though calm, her breast though pure, Motherly cares and fears got head, and raised Some troubled thoughts, which she in sighs thus clad: Oh, what avails me now that honour high, To have conceived of God, or that salute, 'Hail, highly favoured, among women blest!' While I to sorrows am no less advanced, And fears as eminent above the lot Of other women, by the birth I bore: In such a season born, when scarce a shed Could be obtained to shelter him or me From the bleak air? A stable was our warmth, A manger his; yet soon enforced to fly Were dead, who sought his life, and, missing, filled With infant blood the streets of Bethlehem. Hath been our dwelling many years; his life Private, unactive, calm, contemplative, Little suspicious to any king. But now, Full grown to man, acknowledged, as I hear, By John the Baptist, and in public shewn, Son owned from Heaven by his Father's voice, I looked for some great change. To honour? no; But trouble, as old Simeon plain foretold, That to the fall and rising he should be Of many in Israel, and to a sign Spoken against that through my very soul A sword shall pierce. This is my favoured lot, My exaltation to afflictions high! Afflicted I may be, it seems, and blest! I will not argue that, nor will repine. But where delays he now? Some great intent Conceals him. When twelve years he scarce had seen, I lost him, but so found as well I saw He could not lose himself, but went about His Father's business. What he meant I mused Since understand; much more his absence now Thus long to some great purpose he obscures. But I to wait with patience am inured; My heart hath been a storehouse long of things And sayings laid up, pretending strange events. Thus Mary, pondering oft, and oft to mind Recalling what remarkably had passed Since first her Salutation heard, with thoughts Meekly composed awaited the fulfilling: The while her Son, tracing the desert wild, Sole, but with holiest meditations fed, Into himself descended, and at once All his great work to come before him set How to begin, how to accomplish best His end of being on Earth, and mission high. For Satan, with sly preface to return, Had left him vacant, and with speed was gone Up to the middle region of thick air, Where all his Potentates in council sate. There, without sign of boast, or sign of joy, Solicitous and blank, he thus began: Princes, Heaven's ancient Sons, AEthereal Thrones Daemonian Spirits now, from the element Each of his reign allotted, rightlier called Powers of Fire, Air, Water, and Earth beneath So may we hold our place and these mild seats Without new trouble! such an enemy Is risen to invade us, who no less Threatens than our expulsion down to Hell. I, as I undertook, and with the vote Consenting in full frequence was impowered, Have found him, viewed him, tasted him; but find Far other labour to be undergone Than when I dealt with Adam, first of men, Though Adam by his wife's allurement fell, However to this Man inferior far If he be Man by mother's side, at least With more than human gifts from Heaven adorned, Perfections absolute, graces divine, And amplitude of mind to greatest deeds. Therefore I am returned, lest confidence Of my success with Eve in Paradise Deceive ye to persuasion over-sure Of like succeeding here. I summon all Rather to be in readiness with hand Or counsel to assist, lest I, who erst Thought none my equal, now be overmatched. So spake the old Serpent, doubting, and from all With clamour was assured their utmost aid At his command; when from amidst them rose Belial, the dissolutest Spirit that fell, The sensualest, and, after Asmodai, The fleshliest Incubus, and thus advised: Set women in his eye and in his walk, Among daughters of men the fairest found. Many are in each region passing fair As the noon sky, more like to goddesses Than mortal creatures, graceful and discreet, Expert in amorous arts, enchanting tongues Persuasive, virgin majesty with mild And sweet allayed, yet terrible to approach, Skilled to retire, and in retiring draw Hearts after them tangled in amorous nets. Such object hath the power to soften and tame Severest temper, smooth the rugged'st brow, Enerve, and with voluptuous hope dissolve, Draw out with credulous desire, and lead At will the manliest, resolutest breast, As the magnetic hardest iron draws. Women, when nothing else, beguiled the heart Of wisest Solomon, and made him build, And made him bow, to the gods of his wives. To whom quick answer Satan thus returned: Belial, in much uneven scale thou weigh'st All others by thyself. Because of old Thou thyself doat'st on womankind, admiring Their shape, their colour, and attractive grace, None are, thou think'st, but taken with such toys. Before the Flood, thou, with thy lusty crew, False titled Sons of God, roaming the Earth, Cast wanton eyes on the daughters of men, And coupled with them, and begot a race. Have we not seen, or by relation heard, In courts and regal chambers how thou lurk'st, In wood or grove, by mossy fountain-side, In valley or green meadow, to waylay Some beauty rare, Calisto, Clymene, Or Amymone, Syrinx, many more Too long then lay'st thy scapes on names adored, Satyr, or Faun, or Silvan? But these haunts Delight not all. Among the sons of men How many have with a smile made small account Of beauty and her lures, easily scorned All her assaults, on worthier things intent! Remember that Pellean conqueror, A youth, how all the beauties of the East He slightly viewed, and slightly overpassed; How he surnamed of Africa dismissed, In his prime youth, the fair Iberian maid. For Solomon, he lived at ease, and, full Of honour, wealth, high fare, aimed not beyond Higher design than to enjoy his state; Thence to the bait of women lay exposed. But he whom we attempt is wiser far Than Solomon, of more exalted mind, Made and set wholly on the accomplishment Of greatest things. What woman will you find, Though of this age the wonder and the fame, On whom his leisure will voutsafe an eye Of fond desire? Or should she, confident, As sitting queen adored on Beauty's throne, Descend with all her winning charms begirt To enamour, as the zone of Venus once Wrought that effect on Jove so fables tell , How would one look from his majestic brow, Seated as on the top of Virtue's hill, Discountenance her despised, and put to rout All her array, her female pride deject, Or turn to reverent awe! For Beauty stands In the admiration only of weak minds Led captive; cease to admire, and all her plumes Fall flat, and shrink into a trivial toy, At every sudden slighting quite abashed. Therefore with manlier objects we must try His constancy with such as have more shew Of worth, of honour, glory, and popular praise Rocks whereon greatest men have oftest wrecked ; Or that which only seems to satisfy Lawful desires of nature, not beyond. And now I know he hungers, where no food Is to be found, in the wide Wilderness: The rest commit to me; I shall let pass No advantage, and his strength as oft assay. He ceased, and heard their grant in loud acclaim; Then forthwith to him takes a chosen band Of Spirits likest to himself in guile, To be at hand and at his beck appear, If cause were to unfold some active scene Of various persons, each to know his part; Then to the desert takes with these his flight, Where still, from shade to shade, the Son of God, After forty days' fasting, had remained, Now hungering first, and to himself thus said: Where will this end? Four times ten days I have passed Wandering this woody maze, and human food Nor tasted, nor had appetite. That fast To virtue I impute not, or count part Of what I suffer here. If nature need not, Or God support nature without repast, Though needing, what praise is it to endure? But now I feel I hunger; which declares Nature hath need of what she asks. Yet God Can satisfy that need some other way, Though hunger still remain. So it remain Without this body's wasting, I content me, And from the sting of famine fear no harm; Nor mind it, fed with better thoughts, that feed Me hungering more to do my Father's will. It was the hour of night, when thus the Son Communed in silent walk, then laid him down Under the hospitable covert nigh Of trees thick interwoven. There he slept, And dreamed, as appetite is wont to dream, Of meats and drinks, nature's refreshment sweet. Him thought he by the brook of Cherith stood, And saw the ravens with their horny beaks Food to Elijah bringing even and morn Though ravenous, taught to abstain from what they brought; He saw the Prophet also, how he fled Into the desert, and how there he slept Under a juniper then how, awaked, He found his supper on the coals prepared, And by the Angel was bid rise and eat, And eat the second time after repose, The strength whereof sufficed him forty days: Sometimes that with Elijah he partook, Or as a guest with Daniel at his pulse. Thus wore out night; and now the harald Lark Left his ground-nest, high towering to descry The Morn's approach, and greet her with his song. As lightly from his grassy couch up rose Our Saviour, and found all was but a dream; Fasting he went to sleep, and fasting waked. Up to a hill anon his steps he reared, From whose high top to ken the prospect round, If cottage were in view, sheep-cote, or herd; But cottage, herd, or sheep-cote, none he saw Only in a bottom saw a pleasant grove, With chaunt of tuneful birds resounding loud. Thither he bent his way, determined there To rest at noon, and entered soon the shade High-roofed, and walks beneath, and alleys brown, That opened in the midst a woody scene; Nature's own work it seemed Nature taught Art , And, to a superstitious eye, the haunt Of wood-gods and wood-nymphs. He viewed it round; When suddenly a man before him stood, Not rustic as before, but seemlier clad, As one in city or court or palace bred, And with fair speech these words to him addressed: With granted leave officious I return, But much more wonder that the Son of God In this wild solitude so long should bide, Of all things destitute, and, well I know, Not without hunger. Others of some note, As story tells, have trod this wilderness: The fugitive Bond-woman, with her son, Outcast Nebaioth, yet found here relief By a providing Angel; all the race Of Israel here had famished, had not God Rained from heaven manna; and that Prophet bold, Native of Thebez, wandering here, was fed Twice by a voice inviting him to eat. Of thee those forty days none hath regard, Forty and more deserted here indeed. To whom thus Jesus: What conclud'st thou hence? They all had need; I, as thou seest, have none. How hast thou hunger then? Satan replied. Tell me, if food were now before thee set, Wouldst thou not eat? Thereafter as I like the giver, answered Jesus. Why should that Cause thy refusal? said the subtle Fiend. Hast thou not right to all created things? Owe not all creatures, by just right, to thee Duty and service, nor to stay till bid, But tender all their power? Nor mention I Meats by the law unclean, or offered first To idols those young Daniel could refuse; Nor proffered by an enemy though who Would scruple that, with want oppressed? Behold, Nature ashamed, or, better to express, Troubled, that thou shouldst hunger, hath purveyed From all the elements her choicest store, To treat thee as beseems, and as her Lord With honour. Only deign to sit and eat. He spake no dream; for, as his words had end, Our Saviour, lifting up his eyes, beheld, In ample space under the broadest shade, A table richly spread in regal mode, With dishes piled and meats of noblest sort And savour beasts of chase, or fowl of game, In pastry built, or from the spit, or boiled, Grisamber-steamed; all fish, from sea or shore, Freshet or purling brook, of shell or fin, And exquisitest name, for which was drained Pontus, and Lucrine bay, and Afric coast. Alas! how simple, to these cates compared, Was that crude Apple that diverted Eve! And at a stately sideboard, by the wine, That fragrant smell diffused, in order stood Tall stripling youths rich-clad, of fairer hue Than Ganymed or Hylas; distant more, Under the trees now tripped, now solemn stood, Nymphs of Diana's train, and Naiades With fruits and flowers from Amalthea's horn, And ladies of the Hesperides, that seemed Fairer than feigned of old, or fabled since Of faery damsels met in forest wide By knights of Logres, or of Lyones, And all the while harmonious airs were heard Of chiming strings or charming pipes; and winds Of gentlest gale Arabian odours fanned From their soft wings, and Flora's earliest smells. Such was the splendour; and the Tempter now His invitation earnestly renewed: What doubts the Son of God to sit and eat? These are not fruits forbidden; no interdict Defends the touching of these viands pure; Their taste no knowledge works, at least of evil, But life preserves, destroys life's enemy, Hunger, with sweet restorative delight. All these are Spirits of air, and woods, and springs, Thy gentle ministers, who come to pay Thee homage, and acknowledge thee their Lord. What doubt'st thou, Son of God? Sit down and eat. To whom thus Jesus temperately replied: Said'st thou not that to all things I had right? And who withholds my power that right to use? Shall I receive by gift what of my own, When and where likes me best, I can command? I can at will, doubt not, as soon as thou, Command a table in this wilderness, And call swift flights of Angels ministrant, Arrayed in glory, on my cup to attend: Why shouldst thou, then, obtrude this diligence In vain, where no acceptance it can find? And with my hunger what hast thou to do? Thy pompous delicacies I contemn, And count thy specious gifts no gifts, but guiles. To whom thus answered Satan, male-content: That I have also power to give thou seest; If of that power I bring thee voluntary What I might have bestowed on whom I pleased, And rather opportunely in this place Chose to impart to thy apparent need, Why shouldst thou not accept it? But I see What I can do or offer is suspect. Of these things others quickly will dispose, Whose pains have earned the far-fet spoil. With that Both table and provision vanished quite, With sound of harpies' wings and talons heard; Only the importune Tempter still remained, And with these words his temptation pursued: By hunger, that each other creature tames, Thou art not to be harmed, therefore not moved; Thy temperance, invincible besides, For no allurement yields to appetite; And all thy heart is set on high designs, High actions. But wherewith to be achieved? Great acts require great means of enterprise; Thou art unknown, unfriended, low of birth, A carpenter thy father known, thyself Bred up in poverty and straits at home, Lost in a desert here and hunger-bit. Which way, or from what hope, dost thou aspire To greatness? whence authority deriv'st? What followers, what retinue canst thou gain, Or at thy heels the dizzy multitude, Longer than thou canst feed them on thy cost? Money brings honour, friends, conquest, and realms. What raised Antipater the Edomite, And his son Herod placed on Juda's throne, Thy throne, but gold, that got him puissant friends? Therefore, if at great things thou wouldst arrive, Get riches first, get wealth, and treasure heap Not difficult, if thou hearken to me. Riches are mine, fortune is in my hand; They whom I favour thrive in wealth amain, While virtue, valour, wisdom, sit in want. To whom thus Jesus patiently replied: Yet wealth without these three is impotent To gain dominion, or to keep it gained Witness those ancient empires of the earth, In highth of all their flowing wealth dissolved; But men endued with these have oft attained, In lowest poverty, to highest deeds Gideon, and Jephtha, and the shepherd lad Whose offspring on the throne of Juda sate So many ages, and shall yet regain That seat, and reign in Israel without end. Among the Heathen for throughout the world To me is not unknown what hath been done Worthy of memorial canst thou not remember For I esteem those names of men so poor, Who could do mighty things, and could contemn Riches, though offered from the hand of kings. And what in me seems wanting but that I May also in this poverty as soon Accomplish what they did, perhaps and more? Extol not riches, then, the toil of fools, The wise man's cumbrance, if not snare; more apt To slacken virtue and abate her edge Than prompt her to do aught may merit praise. What if with like aversion I reject Riches and realms! Yet not for that a crown, Golden in shew, is but a wreath of thorns, Brings dangers, troubles, cares, and sleepless nights, To him who wears the regal diadem, When on his shoulders each man's burden lies; For therein stands the office of a king, His honour, virtue, merit, and chief praise, That for the public all this weight he bears. Yet he who reigns within himself, and rules Passions, desires, and fears, is more a king Which every wise and virtuous man attains; And who attains not, ill aspires to rule Cities of men, or headstrong multitudes, Subject himself to anarchy within, Or lawless passions in him, which he serves. But to guide nations in the way of truth By saving doctrine, and from error lead To know, and, knowing, worship God aright, Is yet more kingly. This attracts the soul, Governs the inner man, the nobler part; That other o'er the body only reigns, And oft by force which to a generous mind So reigning can be no sincere delight. Besides, to give a kingdom hath been thought Greater and nobler done, and to lay down Far more magnanimous, than to assume. Riches are needless, then, both for themselves, And for thy reason why they should be sought To gain a sceptre, oftest better missed. SO spake the Son of God; and Satan stood A while as mute, confounded what to say, What to reply, confuted and convinced Of his weak arguing and fallacious drift; At length, collecting all his serpent wiles, With soothing words renewed, him thus accosts: I see thou know'st what is of use to know, What best to say canst say, to do canst do; Thy actions to thy words accord; thy words To thy large heart give utterance due; thy heart Contains of good, wise, just, the perfet shape. Should kings and nations from thy mouth consult, Thy counsel would be as the oracle Urim and Thummim, those oraculous gems On Aaron's breast, or tongue of Seers old Infallible; or, wert thou sought to deeds That might require the array of war, thy skill Of conduct would be such that all the world Could not sustain thy prowess, or subsist In battle, though against thy few in arms. These godlike virtues wherefore dost thou hide? Affecting private life, or more obscure In savage wilderness, wherefore deprive All Earth her wonder at thy acts, thyself The fame and glory glory, the reward That sole excites to high attempts the flame Of most erected spirits, most tempered pure AEthereal, who all pleasures else despise, All treasures and all gain esteem as dross, And dignities and powers, all but the highest? Thy years are ripe, and over-ripe. The son Of Macedonian Philip had ere these Won Asia, and the throne of Cyrus held At his dispose; young Scipio had brought down The Carthaginian pride; young Pompey quelled The Pontic king, and in triumph had rode. Yet years, and to ripe years judgment mature, Quench not the thirst of glory, but augment. Great Julius, whom now all the world admires, The more he grew in years, the more inflamed With glory, wept that he had lived so long Ingloroious. But thou yet art not too late. To whom our Saviour calmly thus replied: Thou neither dost persuade me to seek wealth For empire's sake, nor empire to affect For glory's sake, by all thy argument. For what is glory but the blaze of fame, The people's praise, if always praise unmixed? And what the people but a herd confused, A miscellaneous rabble, who extol Things vulgar, and, well weighed, scarce worth the praise? They praise and they admire they know not what, And know not whom, but as one leads the other; And what delight to be by such extolled, To live upon their tongues, and be their talk? Of whom to be dispraised were no small praise His lot who dares be singularly good. The intelligent among them and the wise Are few, and glory scarce of few is raised. This is true glory and renown when God, Looking on the Earth, with approbation marks The just man, and divulges him through Heaven To all his Angels, who with true applause Recount his praises. Thus he did to Job, When, to extend his fame through Heaven and Earth, As thou to thy reproach may'st well remember, He asked thee, 'Hast thou seen my servant Job?' Famous he was in Heaven; on Earth less known, Where glory is false glory, attributed To things not glorious, men not worthy of fame. They err who count it glorious to subdue By conquest far and wide, to overrun Large countries, and in field great battles win, Great cities by assault. What do these worthies But rob and spoil, burn, slaughter, and enslave Peaceable nations, neighbouring or remote, Made captive, yet deserving freedom more Than those their conquerors, who leave behind Nothing but ruin wheresoe'er they rove, And all the flourishing works of peace destroy; Then swell with pride, and must be titled Gods, Great benefactors of mankind, Deliverers, Worshipped with temple, priest, and sacrifice? One is the son of Jove, of Mars the other; Till conqueror Death discover them scarce men, Rowling in brutish vices, and deformed, Violent or shameful death their due reward. But, if there be in glory aught of good; It may be means far different be attained, Without ambition, war, or violence By deeds of peace, by wisdom eminent, By patience, temperance. I mention still Him whom thy wrongs, with saintly patience borne, Made famous in a land and times obscure; Who names not now with honour patient Job? Poor Socrates, who next more memorable? By what he taught and suffered for so doing, For truth's sake suffering death unjust, lives now Equal in fame to proudest conquerors. Yet, if for fame and glory aught be done, Aught suffered if young African for fame His wasted country freed from Punic rage The deed becomes unpraised, the man at least, And loses, though but verbal, his reward. Shall I seek glory, then, as vain men seek, Oft not deserved? I seek not mine, but His Who sent me, and thereby witness whence I am. To whom the Tempter, murmuring, thus replied: Think not so slight of glory, therein least Resembling thy great Father. He seeks glory, And for his glory all things made, all things Orders and governs; nor content in Heaven, By all his Angels glorified, requires Glory from men, from all men, good or bad, Wise or unwise, no difference, no exemption. Above all sacrifice, or hallowed gift, Glory he requires, and glory he receives, Or Barbarous, nor exception hath declared; From us, his foes pronounced, glory he exacts. To whom our Saviour fervently replied: And reason; since his Word all things produced, Though chiefly not for glory as prime end, But to shew forth his goodness, and impart His good communicable to every soul Freely; of whom what could He less expect Than glory and benediction that is, thanks The slightest, easiest, readiest recompense From them who could return him nothing else, And, not returning that, would likeliest render Contempt instead, dishonour, obloquy? Hard recompense, unsuitable return For so much good, so much beneficience! But why should man seek glory, who of his own Hath nothing, and to whom nothing belongs But condemnation, ignominy, and shame Who, for so many benefits received, Turned recreant to God, ingrate and false, And so of all true good himself despoiled; Yet, sacrilegious, to himself would take That which to God alone of right belongs? Yet so much bounty is in God, such grace, That who advances his glory, not their own, Them he himself to glory will advance. So spake the Son of God; and here again Satan had not to answer, but stood struck With guilt of his own sin for he himself, Insatiable of glory, had lost all; Yet of another plea bethought him soon: Of glory, as thou wilt, said he, so deem; Worth or not worth the seeking, let it pass. But to a Kingdom thou art born ordained To sit upon thy father David's throne, By mother's side thy father, though thy right Be now in powerful hands, that will not part Easily from possession won with arms. Reduced a province under Roman yoke, Obeys Tiberius, nor is always ruled With temperate sway: oft have they violated The Temple, oft the Law, with foul affronts, Abominations rather, as did once Antiochus. And think'st thou to regain Thy right by sitting still, or thus retiring? So did not Machabeus. He indeed Retired unto the Desert, but with arms; And o'er a mighty king so oft prevailed That by strong hand his family obtained, Though priests, the crown, and David's throne usurped, With Modin and her suburbs once content. If kingdom move thee not, let move thee zeal And duty zeal and duty are not slow, But on Occasion's forelock watchful wait: They themselves rather are occasion best Zeal of thy Father's house, duty to free Thy country from her heathen servitude. So shalt thou best fulfil, best verify, The Prophets old, who sung thy endless reign The happier reign the sooner it begins. Rein then; what canst thou better do the while? To whom our Saviour answer thus returned: All things are best fulfilled in their due time; And time there is for all things, Truth hath said. If of my reign Prophetic Writ hath told That it shall never end, so, when begin The Father in his purpose hath decreed He in whose hand all times and seasons rowl. What if he hath decreed that I shall first Be tried in humble state, and things adverse, By tribulations, injuries, insults, Contempts, and scorns, and snares, and violence, Suffering, abstaining, quietly expecting Without distrust or doubt, that He may know What I can suffer, how obey? Who best Can suffer best can do, best reign who first Well hath obeyed just trial ere I merit My exaltation without change or end. But what concerns it thee when I begin My everlasting Kingdom? Why art thou Solicitous? What moves thy inquisition? Know'st thou not that my rising is thy fall, And my promotion will be thy destruction? To whom the Tempter, inly racked, replied: Let that come when it comes. All hope is lost Of my reception into grace; what worse? For where no hope is left is left no fear. If there be worse, the expectation more Of worse torments me than the feeling can. I would be at the worst; worst is my port, My harbour, and my ultimate repose, The end I would attain, my final good. My error was my error, and my crime My crime; whatever, for itself condemned, And will alike be punished, whether thou Reign or reign not though to that gentle brow Willingly I could fly, and hope thy reign, From that placid aspect and meek regard, Rather than aggravate my evil state, Would stand between me and thy Father's ire Whose ire I dread more than the fire of Hell A shelter and a kind of shading cool Interposition, as a summer's cloud. If I, then, to the worst that can be haste, Why move thy feet so slow to what is best? Happiest, both to thyself and all the world, That thou, who worthiest art, shouldst be their King! Perhaps thou linger'st in deep thoughts detained Of the enterprise so hazardous and high! No wonder; for, though in thee be united What of perfection can in Man be found, Or human nature can receive, consider Thy life hath yet been private, most part spent At home, scarce viewed the Galilean towns, And once a year Jerusalem, few days' Short sojourn; and what thence couldst thou observe? The world thou hast not seen, much less her glory, Empires, and monarchs, and their radiant courts Best school of best experience, quickest in sight In all things that to greatest actions lead. The wisest, unexperienced, will be ever Timorous, and loth, with novice modesty As he who, seeking asses, found a kingdom Irresolute, unhardy, unadventrous. But I will bring thee where thou soon shalt quit Those rudiments, and see before thine eyes The monarchies of the Earth, their pomp and state Sufficient introduction to inform Thee, of thyself so apt, in regal arts, And regal mysteries; that thou may'st know How best their opposition to withstand. With that such power was given him then , he took The Son of God up to a mountain high. It was a mountain at whose verdant feet A spacious plain outstretched in circuit wide Lay pleasant; from his side two rivers flowed, The one winding, the other straight, and left between Fair champaign, with less rivers interveined, Then meeting joined their tribute to the sea. Fertil of corn the glebe, of oil, and wine; With herds the pasture thronged, with flocks the hills; Huge cities and high-towered, that well might seem The seats of mightiest monarchs; and so large The prospect was that here and there was room For barren desert, fountainless and dry. To this high mountain-top the Tempter brought Our Saviour, and new train of words began: Well have we speeded, and o'er hill and dale, Forest, and field, and flood, temples and towers, Cut shorter many a league. Here thou behold'st Assyria, and her empire's ancient bounds, Araxes and the Caspian lake; thence on As far as Indus east, Euphrates west, And oft beyond; to south the Persian bay, And, inaccessible, the Arabian drouth: Here, Nineveh, of length within her wall Several days' journey, built by Ninus old, Of that first golden monarchy the seat, And seat of Salmanassar, whose success Israel in long captivity still mourns; There Babylon, the wonder of all tongues, As ancient, but rebuilt by him who twice Judah and all thy father David's house Led captive, and Jerusalem laid waste, Till Cyrus set them free; Persepolis, His city, there thou seest, and Bactra there; Ecbatana her structure vast there shews, And Hecatompylos her hunderd gates; There Susa by Choaspes, amber stream, The drink of none but kings; of later fame, Built by Emathian or by Parthian hands, The great Seleucia, Nisibis, and there Turning with easy eye, thou may'st behold. All these the Parthian now some ages past By great Arsaces led, who founded first That empire under his dominion holds, From the luxurious kings of Antioch won. And just in time thou com'st to have a view Of his great power; for now the Parthian king In Ctesiphon hath gathered all his host Against the Scythian, whose incursions wild Have wasted Sogdiana; to her aid He marches now in haste. See, though from far, His thousands, in what martial equipage They issue forth, steel bows and shafts their arms, Of equal dread in flight or in pursuit All horsemen, in which fight they most excel; See how in warlike muster they appear, In rhombs, and wedges, and half-moons, and wings. He looked, and saw what numbers numberless The city gates outpoured, light-armed troops In coats of mail and military pride. In mail their horses clad, yet fleet and strong, Prauncing their riders bore, the flower and choice Of many provinces from bound to bound From Arachosia, from Candaor east, And Margiana, to the Hyrcanian cliffs Of Caucasus, and dark Iberian dales; From Atropatia, and the neighbouring plains Of Adiabene, Media, and the south Of Susiana, to Balsara's haven. He saw them in their forms of battle ranged, How quick they wheeled, and flying behind them shot Sharp sleet of arrowy showers against the face Of their pursuers, and overcame by flight; The field all iron cast a gleaming brown. Nor wanted clouds of foot, nor, on each horn, Cuirassiers all in steel for standing fight, Chariots, or elephants indorsed with towers Of archers; nor of labouring pioners To lay hills plain, fell woods, or valleys fill, Or where plain was raise hill, or overlay With bridges rivers proud, as with a yoke: Mules after these, camels and dromedaries, And waggons fraught with utensils of war. Such forces met not, nor so wide a camp, When Agrican, with all his northern powers, Besieged Albracea, as romances tell, The city of Gallaphrone, from thence to win The fairest of her sex, Angelica, His daughter, sought by many prowest knights, Both Paynim and the peers of Charlemane. Such and so numerous was their chivalry; At sight whereof the Fiend yet more presumed, And to our Saviour thus his words renewed: That thou may'st know I seek not to engage Thy virtue, and not every way secure On no slight grounds thy safety, hear and mark To what end I have brought thee hither, and shew All this fair sight. Thy kingdom, though foretold By Prophet or by Angel, unless thou Endeavour, as thy father David did, Thou never shalt obtain: prediction still In all things, and all men, supposes means; Without means used, what it predicts revokes. But say thou wert possessed of David's throne By free consent of all, none opposite, Long to enjoy it quiet and secure Between two such enclosing enemies, Roman and Parthian? Therefore one of these Thou must make sure thy own: the Parthian first, By my advice, as nearer, and of late Found able by invasion to annoy Thy country, and captive lead away her kings, Antigonus and old Hyrcanus, bound, Maugre the Roman. It shall be my task To render thee the Parthian at dispose, Choose which thou wilt, by conquest or by league. By him thou shalt regain, without him not, That which alone can truly reinstall thee In David's royal seat, his true successor Deliverance of thy brethren, those Ten Tribes Whose offspring in his territory yet serve In Habor, and among the Medes dispersed: The sons of Jacob, two of Joseph, lost Thus long from Israel, serving, as of old This offer sets before thee to deliver. These if from servitude thou shalt restore To their inheritance, then, nor till then, Thou on the throne of David in full glory, Shalt reign, and Rome or Caesar not need fear. To whom our Saviour answered thus, unmoved: Much ostentation vain of fleshly arm And fragile arms, much instrument of war, Long in preparing, soon to nothing brought, Before mine eyes thou hast set, and in my ear Vented much policy, and projects deep Of enemies, of aids, battles, and leagues, Plausible to the world, to me worth naught. Means I must use, thou say'st; prediction else Will unpredict, and fail me of the throne! My time, I told thee and that time for thee Were better farthest off , is not yet come. When that comes, think not thou to find me slack On my part aught endeavouring, or to need Thy politic maxims, or that cumbersome Luggage of war there shewn me argument Of human weakness rather than of strength. My brethren, as thou call'st them, those Ten Tribes, I must deliver, if I mean to reign David's true heir, and his full sceptre sway To just extent over all Israel's sons! But whence to thee this zeal? Where was it then For Israel, or for David, or his throne, When thou stood'st up his tempter to the pride Of numbering Israel which cost the lives of threescore and ten thousand Israelites By three days' pestilence? Such was thy zeal To Israel then, the same that now to me. As for those captive tribes, themselves were they Who wrought their own captivity, fell off From God to worship calves, the deities And all the idolatries of heathen round, Besides their other worse than heathenish crimes; Nor in the land of their captivity Humbled themselves, or penitent besought The God of their forefathers, but so died Impenitent, and left a race behind Like to themselves, distinguishable scarce From Gentiles, but by circumcision vain, And God with idols in their worship joined. Should I of these the liberty regard, Who, freed, as to their ancient patrimony, Unhumbled, unrepentant, unreformed, Headlong would follow, and to their gods perhaps Of Bethel and of Dan? No; let them serve Their enemies who serve idols with God. Yet He at length, time to himself best known, Remembering Abraham, by some wondrous call May bring them back, repentant and sincere, And at their passing cleave the Assyrian flood, While to their native land with joy they haste, As the Red Sea and Jordan once he cleft, When to the Promised Land their fathers passed. To his due time and providence I leave them. So spake Israel's true King, and to the Fiend Made answer meet, that made void all his wiles. So fares it when with truth falsehood contends. Perplexed and troubled at his bad success The Tempter stood, nor had what to reply, Discovered in his fraud, thrown from his hope So oft, and the persuasive rhetoric That sleeked his tongue, and won so much on Eve, So little here, nay lost. But Eve was Eve; This far his over-match, who, self-deceived And rash, beforehand had no better weighed The strength he was to cope with, or his own. But as a man who had been matchless held In cunning, over-reached where least he thought, To salve his credit, and for very spite, Still will be tempting him who foils him still, And never cease, though to his shame the more; Or as a swarm of flies in vintage-time, About the wine-press where sweet must is poured, Beat off, returns as oft with humming sound; Or surging waves against a solid rock, Though all to shivers dashed, the assault renew, Vain battery! and in froth or bubbles end So Satan, whom repulse upon repulse Met ever, and to shameful silence brought, Yet gives not o'er, though desperate of success, And his vain importunity pursues. He brought our Saviour to the western side Of that high mountain, whence he might behold Another plain, long, but in breadth not wide, Washed by the southern sea, and on the north To equal length backed with a ridge of hills That screened the fruits of the earth and seats of men From cold Septentrion blasts; thence in the midst Divided by a river, off whose banks On each side an Imperial City stood, With towers and temples proudly elevate On seven small hills, with palaces adorned, Porches and theatres, baths, aqueducts, Statues and trophies, and triumphal arcs, Gardens and groves, presented to his eyes Above the highth of mountains interposed By what strange parallax, or optic skill Of vision, multiplied through air, or glass Of telescope, were curious to enquire. And now the Tempter thus his silence broke: The city which thou seest no other deem Than great and glorious Rome, Queen of the Earth So far renowned, and with the spoils enriched Of nations. There the Capitol thou seest, Above the rest lifting his stately head On the Tarpeian rock, her citadel Impregnable; and there Mount Palatine, The imperial palace, compass huge, and high The structure, skill of noblest architects, With gilded battlements, conspicuous far, Turrets, and terraces, and glittering spires. Many a fair edifice besides, more like Houses of gods so well I have disposed My aerie microscope thou may'st behold, Outside and inside both, pillars and roofs Carved work, the hand of famed artificers In cedar, marble, ivory, or gold. Thence to the gates cast round thine eye, and see What conflux issuing forth, or entering in: Praetors, proconsuls to their provinces Hasting, or on return, in robes of state; Lictors and rods, the ensigns of their power; Legions and cohorts, turms of horse and wings; Or embassies from regions far remote, In various habits, on the Appian road, Or on the AEmilian some from farthest south, Syene, and where the shadow both way falls, Meroe, Nilotic isle, and, more to west, The realm of Bocchus to the Blackmoor sea; From the Asian kings and Parthian among these , And utmost Indian isle Taprobane, Dusk faces with white silken turbants wreathed; From Gallia, Gades, and the British west; Germans, and Scythians, and Sarmatians north Beyond Danubius to the Tauric pool. All nations now to Rome obedience pay To Rome's great Emperor, whose wide domain, In ample territory, wealth and power, Civility of manners, arts and arms, And long renown, thou justly may'st prefer Before the Parthian. These two thrones except, The rest are barbarous, and scarce worth the sight, Shared among petty kings too far removed; These having shewn thee, I have shewn thee all The kingdoms of the world, and all their glory. This Emperor hath no son, and now is old, Old and lascivious, and from Rome retired To Capreae, an island small but strong On the Campanian shore, with purpose there His horrid lusts in private to enjoy; Committing to a wicked favourite All public cares, and yet of him suspicious; Hated of all, and hating. With what ease, Endued with regal virtues as thou art, Appearing, and beginning noble deeds, Might'st thou expel this monster from his throne, Now made a sty, and, in his place ascending, A victor-people free from servile yoke! And with my help thou may'st; to me the power Is given, and by that right I give it thee. Aim, therefore, at no less than all the world; Aim at the highest; without the highest attained, Will be for thee no sitting, or not long, On David's throne, be prophesied what will. To whom the Son of God, unmoved, replied: Nor doth this grandeur and majestic shew Of luxury, though called magnificence, More than of arms before, allure mine eye, Much less my mind; though thou should'st add to tell Their sumptuous gluttonies, and gorgeous feasts On citron tables or Atlantic stone For I have also heard, perhaps have read , Their wines of Setia, Cales, and Falerne, Chios and Crete, and how they quaff in gold, Crystal, and myrrhine cups, imbossed with gems And studs of pearl to me should'st tell, who thirst And hunger still. Then embassies thou shew'st From nations far and nigh! What honour that, But tedious waste of time, to sit and hear So many hollow compliments and lies, Outlandish flatteries? Then proceed'st to talk Of the Emperor, how easily subdued, How gloriously. I shall, thou say'st, expel A brutish monster: what if I withal Expel a Devil who first made him such? Let his tormentor, Conscience, find him out; For him I was not sent, nor yet to free That people, victor once, now vile and base, Deservedly made vassal who, once just, Frugal, and mild, and temperate, conquered well, But govern ill the nations under yoke, Peeling their provinces, exhausted all By lust and rapine; first ambitious grown Of triumph, that insulting vanity; Then cruel, by their sports to blood inured Of fighting beasts, and men to beasts exposed; Luxurious by their wealth, and greedier still, And from the daily Scene effeminate. What wise and valiant man would seek to free These, thus degenerate, by themselves enslaved, Or could of inward slaves make outward free? Know, therefore, when my season comes to sit On David's throne, it shall be like a tree Spreading and overshadowing all the earth, Or as a stone that shall to pieces dash All monarchies besides throughout the world; And of my Kingdom there shall be no end. Means there shall be to this; but what the means Is not for thee to know, nor me to tell. To whom the Tempter, impudent, replied: I see all offers made by me how slight Thou valuest, because offered, and reject'st. Nothing will please the difficult and nice, Or nothing more than still to contradict. On the other side know also thou that I On what I offer set as high esteem, Nor what I part with mean to give for naught, All these, which in a moment thou behold'st, The kingdoms of the world, to thee I give For, given to me, I give to whom I please , No trifle; yet with this reserve, not else On this condition, if thou wilt fall down, And worship me as thy superior Lord Easily done , and hold them all of me; For what can less so great a gift deserve? Whom thus our Saviour answered with disdain: I never liked thy talk, thy offers less; Now both abhor, since thou hast dared to utter The abominable terms, impious condition. But I endure the time, till which expired Thou hast permission on me. It is written, The first of all commandments, 'Thou shalt worship The Lord thy God, and only Him shalt serve.' And dar'st thou to the Son of God propound To worship thee, accursed? now more accursed For this attempt, bolder than that on Eve, And more blasphemous; which expect to rue. The kingdoms of the world to thee were given! Permitted rather, and by thee usurped; Other donation none thou canst produce. If given, by whom but by the King of kings, God over all supreme? If given to thee, By thee how fairly is the Giver now Repaid! But gratitude in thee is lost Long since. Wert thou so void of fear or shame As offer them to me, the Son of God To me my own, on such abhorred pact, That I fall down and worship thee as God? Get thee behind me! Plain thou now appear'st That Evil One, Satan for ever damned. To whom the Fiend, with fear abashed, replied: Be not so sore offended, Son of God Though Sons of God both Angels are and Men If I, to try whether in higher sort Than these thou bear'st that title, have proposed What both from Men and Angels I receive, Nations besides from all the quartered winds God of this World invoked, and World beneath. Who then thou art, whose coming is foretold To me most fatal, me it most concerns. The trial hath indamaged thee no way, Rather more honour left and more esteem; Me naught advantaged, missing what I aimed. Therefore let pass, as they are transitory, The kingdoms of this world; I shall no more Advise thee; gain them as thou canst, or not. And thou thyself seem'st otherwise inclined Than to a worldly crown, addicted more To contemplation and profound dispute; As by that early action may be judged, When, slipping from thy mother's eye, thou went'st Alone into the Temple, there wast found Among the gravest Rabbies, disputant On points and questions fitting Moses' chair, Teaching, not taught. The childhood shews the man, As morning shews the day. Be famous, then, By wisdom; as thy empire must extend, So let extend thy mind o'er all the world In knowledge; all things in it comprehend. All knowledge is not couched in Moses' law, The Pentateuch, or what the Prophets wrote; The Gentiles also know, and write, and teach To admiration, led by Nature's light; And with the Gentiles much thou must converse, Ruling them by persuasion, as thou mean'st. Without their learning, how wilt thou with them, Or they with thee, hold conversation meet? How wilt thou reason with them, how refute Their idolisms, traditions, paradoxes? Error by his own arms is best evinced. Look once more, ere we leave this specular mount, Westward, much nearer by south-west; behold Where on the AEgean shore a city stands, Built nobly, pure the air and light the soil Athens, the eye of Greece, mother of arts And Eloquence, native to famous wits Or hospitable, in her sweet recess, City or suburban, studious walks and shades. See there the olive-grove of Academe, Plato's retirement, where the Attic bird Trills her thick-warbled notes the summer long; There, flowery hill, Hymettus, with the sound Of bees' industrious murmur, oft invites To studious musing; there Ilissus rowls His whispering stream. Within the walls then view The schools of ancient sages his who bred Great Alexander to subdue the world, Lyceum there; and painted Stoa next. There thou shalt hear and learn the secret power Of harmony, in tones and numbers hit By voice or hand, and various-measured verse, AEolian charms and Dorian lyric odes, And his who gave them breath, but higher sung, Blind Melesigenes, thence Homer called, Whose poem Phoebus challenged for his own. Thence what the lofty grave Tragedians taught In chorus or iambic, teachers best Of moral prudence, with delight received In brief sententious precepts, while they treat Of fate, and chance, and change in human life, High actions and high passions best describing. Thence to the famous Orators repair, Those ancient whose resistless eloquence Wielded at will that fierce democraty, Shook the Arsenal, and fulmined over Greece To Macedon and Artaxerxes' throne. To sage Philosophy next lend thine ear, From heaven descended to the low-roofed house Of Socrates see there his tenement Whom, well inspired, the Oracle pronounced Wisest of men; from whose mouth issued forth Mellifluous streams, that watered all the schools Of Academics old and new, with those Surnamed Peripatetics, and the sect Epicurean, and the Stoic severe. These here revolve, or, as thou likest, at home, Till time mature thee to a kingdom's weight; These rules will render thee a king complete Within thyself, much more with empire joined. To whom our Saviour sagely thus replied: Think not but that I know these things; or, think I know them not, not therefore am I short Of knowing what I ought. He who receives Light from above, from the Fountain of Light, No other doctrine needs, though granted true; But these are false, or little else but dreams, Conjectures, fancies, built on nothing firm. The first and wisest of them all professed To know this only, that he nothing knew; The next to fabling fell and smooth conceits; A third sort doubted all things, though plain sense; Others in virtue placed felicity, But virtue joined with riches and long life; In corporal pleasure he, and careless ease; The Stoic last in philosophic pride, By him called virtue, and his virtuous man, Wise, perfect in himself, and all possessing, Equal to God, oft shames not to prefer, As fearing God nor man, contemning all Wealth, pleasure, pain or torment, death and life Which, when he lists, he leaves, or boasts he can; For all his tedious talk is but vain boast, Or subtle shifts conviction to evade. Alas! what can they teach, and not mislead, Ignorant of themselves, of God much more, And how the World began, and how Man fell, Degraded by himself, on grace depending? Much of the Soul they talk, but all awry; And in themselves seek virtue; and to themselves All glory arrogate, to God give none; Rather accuse him under usual names, Fortune and Fate, as one regardless quite Of mortal things. Who, therefore, seeks in these True wisdom finds her not, or, by delusion Far worse, her false resemblance only meets, An empty cloud. However, many books, Wise men have said, are wearisome; who reads Incessantly, and to his reading brings not A spirit and judgment equal or superior, And what he brings what needs he elsewhere seek? Uncertain and unsettled still remains, Deep-versed in books and shallow in himself, Crude or intoxicate, collecting toys And trifles for choice matters, worth a sponge, As children gathering pebbles on the shore. Or, if I would delight my private hours With music or with poem, where so soon As in our native language can I find That solace? All our Law and Story strewed With hymns, our Psalms with artful terms inscribed, Our Hebrew songs and harps, in Babylon That pleased so well our victor's ear, declare That rather Greece from us these arts derived Ill imitated while they loudest sing The vices of their deities, and their own, In fable, hymn, or song, so personating Their gods ridiculous, and themselves past shame. Remove their swelling epithetes, thick-laid As varnish on a harlot's cheek, the rest, Thin-sown with aught of profit or delight, Will far be found unworthy to compare With Sion's songs, to all true tastes excelling, Where God is praised aright and godlike men, Such are from God inspired, not such from thee ; Unless where moral virtue is expressed By light of Nature, not in all quite lost. Their orators thou then extoll'st as those The top of eloquence statists indeed, And lovers of their country, as may seem; But herein to our Prophets far beneath, As men divinely taught, and better teaching The solid rules of civil government, In their majestic, unaffected style, Than all the oratory of Greece and Rome. In them is plainest taught, and easiest learnt, What makes a nation happy, and keeps it so, What ruins kingdoms, and lays cities flat; These only, with our Law, best form a king. So spake the Son of God; but Satan, now Quite at a loss for all his darts were spent , Thus to our Saviour, with stern brow, replied: Since neither wealth nor honour, arms nor arts, Kingdom nor empire, pleases thee, nor aught By me proposed in life contemplative Or active, tended on by glory or fame, What dost thou in this world? The Wilderness For thee is fittest place: I found thee there, And thither will return thee. Yet remember What I foretell thee; soon thou shalt have cause To wish thou never hadst rejected, thus Nicely or cautiously, my offered aid, Which would have set thee in short time with ease On David's throne, or throne of all the world, Now at full age, fulness of time, thy season, When prophecies of thee are best fulfilled. Now, contrary if I read aught in heaven, Or heaven write aught of fate by what the stars Voluminous, or single characters In their conjunction met, give me to spell, Sorrows and labours, opposition, hate, Attends thee; scorns, reproaches, injuries, Violence and stripes, and, lastly, cruel death. A kingdom they portend thee, but what kingdom, Real or allegoric, I discern not; Nor when: eternal sure as without end, Without beginning; for no date prefixed Directs me in the starry rubric set. So saying, he took for still he knew his power Not yet expired , and to the Wilderness Brought back, the Son of God, and left him there, Feigning to disappear. Darkness now rose, As daylight sunk, and brought in louring Night, Her shadowy offspring, unsubstantial both, Privation mere of light and absent day. Our Saviour, meek, and with untroubled mind After hisaerie jaunt, though hurried sore, Hungry and cold, betook him to his rest, Wherever, under some concourse of shades, Whose branching arms thick intertwined might shield From dews and damps of night his sheltered head; But, sheltered, slept in vain; for at his head The Tempter watched, and soon with ugly dreams Disturbed his sleep. And either tropic now 'Gan thunder, and both ends of heaven; the clouds From many a horrid rift abortive poured Fierce rain with lightning mixed, water with fire, In ruin reconciled; nor slept the winds Within their stony caves, but rushed abroad From the four hinges of the world, and fell On the vexed wilderness, whose tallest pines, Though rooted deep as high, and sturdiest oaks, Bowed their stiff necks, loaden with stormy blasts, Or torn up sheer. Ill wast thou shrouded then, O patient Son of God, yet only stood'st Unshaken! Nor yet staid the terror there: Infernal ghosts and hellish furies round Environed thee; some howled, some yelled, some shrieked, Some bent at thee their fiery darts, while thou Sat'st unappalled in calm and sinless peace. Thus passed the night so foul, till Morning fair Came forth with pilgrim steps, in amice grey, Who with her radiant finger stilled the roar Of thunder, chased the clouds, and laid the winds, And griesly spectres, which the Fiend had raised To tempt the Son of God with terrors dire. And now the sun with more effectual beams Had cheered the face of earth, and dried the wet From drooping plant, or dropping tree; the birds, Who all things now behold more fresh and green, After a night of storm so ruinous, Cleared up their choicest notes in bush and spray, To gratulate the sweet return of morn. Nor yet, amidst this joy and brightest morn, Was absent, after all his mischief done, The Prince of Darkness; glad would also seem Of this fair change, and to our Saviour came; Yet with no new device they all were spent , Rather by this his last affront resolved, Desperate of better course, to vent his rage And mad despite to be so oft repelled. Him walking on a sunny hill he found, Backed on the north and west by a thick wood; Out of the wood he starts in wonted shape, And in a careless mood thus to him said: Fair morning yet betides thee, Son of God, After a dismal night. I heard the wrack, As earth and sky would mingle; but myself Was distant; and these flaws, though mortals fear them, As dangerous to the pillared frame of Heaven, Or to the Earth's dark basis underneath, Are to the main as inconsiderable And harmless, if not wholesome, as a sneeze To man's less universe, and soon are gone. Yet, as being ofttimes noxious where they light On man, beast, plant, wasteful and turbulent, Like turbulencies in the affairs of men, Over whose heads they roar, and seem to point, They oft fore-signify and threaten ill. This tempest at this desert most was bent; Of men at thee, for only thou here dwell'st. Did I not tell thee, if thou didst reject The perfect season offered with my aid To win thy destined seat, but wilt prolong All to the push of fate, pursue thy way Of gaining David's throne no man knows when For both the when and how is nowhere told , Thou shalt be what thou art ordained, no doubt; For Angels have proclaimed it, but concealing The time and means? Each act is rightliest done Not when it must, but when it may be best. If thou observe not this, be sure to find What I foretold thee many a hard assay Of dangers, and adversities, and pains, Ere thou of Israel's sceptre get fast hold; Whereof this ominous night that closed thee round, So many terrors, voices, prodigies, May warn thee, as a sure foregoing sign. So talked he, while the Son of God went on, And staid not, but in brief him answered thus: Me worse than wet thou find'st not; other harm Those terrors which thou speak'st of did me none. I never feared they could, though noising loud And threatening nigh: what they can do as signs Betokening or ill-boding I contemn As false portents, not sent from God, but thee; Who, knowing I shall reign past thy preventing, Obtrud'st thy offered aid, that I, accepting, At least might seem to hold all power of thee, Ambitious Spirit! and would'st be thought my God; And storm'st, refused, thinking to terrify Me to thy will! Desist thou art discerned, And toil'st in vain , nor me in vain molest. To whom the Fiend, now swoln with rage, replied: Then hear, O Son of David, virgin-born! For Son of God to me is yet in doubt. Of the Messiah I have heard foretold By all the Prophets; of thy birth, at length Announced by Gabriel, with the first I knew, And of the angelic song in Bethlehem field, On thy birth-night, that sung thee Saviour born. From that time seldom have I ceased to eye Thy infancy, thy childhood, and thy youth, Thy manhood last, though yet in private bred; Till, at the ford of Jordan, whither all Flocked to the Baptist, I among the rest Though not to be baptized , by voice from Heaven Heard thee pronounced the Son of God beloved. Thenceforth I thought thee worth my nearer view And narrower scrutiny, that I might learn In what degree or meaning thou art called The Son of God, which bears no single sense. The Son of God I also am, or was; And, if I was, I am; relation stands: All men are Sons of God; yet thee I thought In some respect far higher so declared. Therefore I watched thy footsteps from that hour, And followed thee still on to this waste wild, Where, by all best conjectures, I collect Thou art to be my fatal enemy. Good reason, then, if I beforehand seek To understand my adversary, who And what he is; his wisdom, power, intent; By parle or composition, truce or league, To win him, or win from him what I can. And opportunity I here have had To try thee, sift thee, and confess have found thee Proof against all temptation, as a rock Of adamant and as a centre, firm To the utmost of mere man both wise and good, Not more; for honours, riches, kingdoms, glory, Have been before contemned, and may again. Therefore, to know what more thou art than man, Worth naming the Son of God by voice from Heaven, Another method I must now begin. So saying, he caught him up, and, without wing Of hippogrif, bore through the air sublime, Over the wilderness and o'er the plain, Till underneath them fair Jerusalem, The Holy City, lifted high her towers, And higher yet the glorious Temple reared Her pile, far off appearing like a mount Of alablaster, topt with golden spires: There, on the highest pinnacle, he set The Son of God, and added thus in scorn: There stand, if thou wilt stand; to stand upright Will ask thee skill. I to thy Father's house Have brought thee, and highest placed: highest is best. Now shew thy progeny; if not to stand, Cast thyself down. Safely, if Son of God; For it is written, 'He will give command Concerning thee to his Angels; in their hands They shall uplift thee, lest at any time Thou chance to dash thy foot against a stone.' To whom thus Jesus: Also it is written, 'Tempt not the Lord thy God.' He said, and stood; But Satan, smitten with amazement, fell. As when Earth's son, Antaeus to compare Small things with greatest , in Irassa strove With Jove's Alcides, and, oft foiled, still rose, Receiving from his mother Earth new strength, Fresh from his fall, and fiercer grapple joined, Throttled at length in the air expired and fell, So, after many a foil, the Tempter proud, Renewing fresh assaults, amidst his pride Fell whence he stood to see his victor fall; And, as that Theban monster that proposed Her riddle, and him who solved it not devoured, That once found out and solved, for grief and spite Cast herself headlong from the Ismenian steep, So, strook with dread and anguish, fell the Fiend, And to his crew, that sat consulting, brought Joyless triumphals of his hoped success, Ruin, and desperation, and dismay, Who durst so proudly tempt the Son of God. So Satan fell; and straight a fiery globe Of Angels on full sail of wing flew nigh, Who on their plumy vans received Him soft From his uneasy station, and upbore, As on a floating couch, through the blithe air; Then, in a flowery valley, set him down On a green bank, and set before him spread A table of celestial food, divine Ambrosial fruits fetched from the Tree of Life, And from the Fount of Life ambrosial drink, That soon refreshed him wearied, and repaired What hunger, if aught hunger, had impaired, Or thirst; and, as he fed, Angelic quires Sung heavenly anthems of his victory Over temptation and the Tempter proud: True Image of the Father, whether throned In the bosom of bliss, and light of light Conceiving, or, remote from Heaven, enshrined In fleshly tabernacle and human form, Wandering the wilderness whatever place, Habit, or state, or motion, still expressing The Son of God, with Godlike force endued Against the attempter of thy Father's throne And thief of Paradise! Him long of old Thou didst debel, and down from Heaven cast With all his army; now thou hast avenged Supplanted Adam, and, by vanquishing Temptation, hast regained lost Paradise, And frustrated the conquest fraudulent. He never more henceforth will dare set foot In paradise to tempt; his snares are broke. For, though that seat of earthly bliss be failed, A fairer Paradise is founded now For Adam and his chosen sons, whom thou, A Saviour, art come down to reinstall; Where they shall dwell secure, when time shall be, Of tempter and temptation without fear. But thou, Infernal Serpent! shalt not long Rule in the clouds. Like an autumnal star, Or lightning, thou shalt fall from Heaven, trod down Under his feet. For proof, ere this thou feel'st Thy wound yet not thy last and deadliest wound By this repulse received, and hold'st in Hell No triumph; in all her gates Abaddon rues Thy bold attempt. Hereafter learn with awe To dread the Son of God. He, all unarmed, Shall chase thee, with the terror of his voice, From thy demoniac holds, possession foul Thee and thy legions; yelling they shall fly, And beg to hide them in a herd of swine, Lest he command them down into the Deep, Bound, and to torment sent before their time. Hail, Son of the Most High, heir of both Worlds, Queller of Satan! On thy glorious work Now enter, and begin to save Mankind. Thus they the Son of God, our Saviour meek, Sung victor, and, from heavenly feast refreshed, Brought on his way with joy. He, unobserved, Home to his mother's house private returned. <|endofpoem|> HENCE, loathed Melancholy, Of Cerberus and blackest Midnight born In Stygian cave forlorn unholy! Find out some uncouth cell, Where brooding Darkness spreads his jealous wings, And the night-raven sings; As ragged as thy locks, But come, thou Goddess fair and free, In heaven yclept Euphrosyne, And by men heart-easing Mirth; Whom lovely Venus, at a birth, With two sister Graces more, To ivy-crowned Bacchus bore: Or whether as some sager sing The frolic wind that breathes the spring, Zephyr, with Aurora playing, As he met her once a-Maying, There, on beds of violets blue, And fresh-blown roses washed in dew, Filled her with thee, a daughter fair, So buxom, blithe, and debonair. Haste thee, Nymph, and bring with thee Jest, and youthful Jollity, Quips and cranks and wanton wiles, Nods and becks and wreathed smiles Such as hang on Hebe's cheek, And love to live in dimple sleek; Sport that wrinkled Care derides, And Laughter holding both his sides. Come, and trip it, as you go, On the light fantastic toe; And in thy right hand lead with thee The mountain-nymph, sweet Liberty; And, if I give thee honour due, Mirth, admit me of thy crew, To live with her, and live with thee, In unreproved pleasures free: To hear the lark begin his flight, And, singing, startle the dull night, From his watch-tower in the skies, Till the dappled dawn doth rise; Then to come, in spite of sorrow, And at my window bid good-morrow, Through the sweet-briar or the vine, Or the twisted eglantine; While the cock, with lively din, Scatters the rear of darkness thin, And to the stack, or the barn-door, Stoutly struts his dames before: Oft listening how the hounds and horn Cheerly rouse the slumbering morn, From the side of some hoar hill, Through the high wood echoing shrill: Sometime walking, not unseen, By hedgerow elms, on hillocks green, Right against the eastern gate Where the great Sun begins his state, Robed in flames and amber light, The clouds in thousand liveries dight; While the ploughman, near at hand, Whistles o'er the furrowed land, And the milkmaid singeth blithe, And the mower whets his scythe, And every shepherd tells his tale Under the hawthorn in the dale. Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures, Whilst the landskip round it measures: Russet lawns, and fallows grey, Where the nibbling flocks do stray; Mountains on whose barren breast The labouring clouds do often rest; Meadows trim, with daisies pied; Shallow brooks, and rivers wide; Towers and battlements it sees Bosomed high in tufted trees, Where perhaps some beauty lies, The cynosure of neighbouring eyes. Hard by a cottage chimney smokes From betwixt two aged oaks, Are at their savoury dinner set Of herbs and other country messes, Which the neat-handed Phyllis dresses; And then in haste her bower she leaves, With Thestylis to bind the sheaves; Or, if the earlier season lead, To the tanned haycock in the mead. Sometimes, with secure delight, The upland hamlets will invite, When the merry bells ring round, And the jocund rebecks sound To many a youth and many a maid Dancing in the chequered shade, And young and old come forth to play On a sunshine holiday, Till the livelong daylight fail: Then to the spicy nut-brown ale, With stories told of many a feat, How Faery Mab the junkets eat. She was pinched and pulled, she said; And he, by Friar's lantern led, Tells how the drudging goblin sweat To earn his cream-bowl duly set, When in one night, ere glimpse of morn, His shadowy flail hath threshed the corn That ten day-labourers could not end; Then lies him down, the lubber fiend, And, stretched out all the chimney's length, Basks at the fire his hairy strength, And crop-full out of doors he flings, Ere the first cock his matin rings. Thus done the tales, to bed they creep, By whispering winds soon lulled asleep. Towered cities please us then, And the busy hum of men, Where throngs of knights and barons bold, In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold With store of ladies, whose bright eyes Rain influence, and judge the prize Of wit or arms, while both contend To win her grace whom all commend. There let Hymen oft appear In saffron robe, with taper clear, And pomp, and feast, and revelry, With mask and antique pageantry; Such sights as youthful poets dream On summer eves by haunted stream. Then to the well-trod stage anon, If Jonson's learned sock be on, Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy's child, Warble his native wood-notes wild. And ever, against eating cares, Lap me in soft Lydian airs, Married to immortal verse, Such as the meeting soul may pierce, In notes with many a winding bout Of linked sweetness long drawn out With wanton heed and giddy cunning, The melting voice through mazes running, Untwisting all the chains that tie The hidden soul of harmony; That Orpheus' self may heave his head From golden slumber on a bed Of heaped Elysian flowers, and hear Such strains as would have won the ear Of Pluto to have quite set free His half-regained Eurydice. These delights if thou canst give, Mirth, with thee I mean to live. HENCE, vain deluding Joys, How little you bested Or fill the fixed mind with all your toys! Dwell in some idle brain, And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess, As thick and numberless Or likest hovering dreams, But, hail! thou Goddess sage and holy! Hail, divinest Melancholy! Whose saintly visage is too bright To hit the sense of human sight, And therefore to our weaker view O'erlaid with black, staid Wisdom's hue; Black, but such as in esteem Prince Memnon's sister might beseem, Or that starred Ethiop queen that strove To set her beauty's praise above The Sea-Nymphs, and their powers offended. Yet thou art higher far descended: Thee bright-haired Vesta long of yore To solitary Saturn bore; His daughter she; in Saturn's reign Such mixture was not held a stain. Oft in glimmering bowers and glades He met her, and in secret shades Of woody Ida's inmost grove, Whilst yet there was no fear of Jove. Come, pensive Nun, devout and pure, Sober, steadfast, and demure, All in a robe of darkest grain, Flowing with majestic train, And sable stole of cypress lawn Over thy decent shoulders drawn. Come; but keep thy wonted state, With even step, and musing gait, And looks commercing with the skies, Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes: There, held in holy passion still, Forget thyself to marble, till With a sad leaden downward cast Thou fix them on the earth as fast. And join with thee calm Peace and Quiet, Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet, And hears the Muses in a ring Aye round about Jove's altar sing; And add to these retired Leisure, That in trim gardens takes his pleasure; But, first and chiefest, with thee bring Him that yon soars on golden wing, Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne, And the mute Silence hist along, 'Less Philomel will deign a song, In her sweetest saddest plight, Smoothing the rugged brow of Night, While Cynthia checks her dragon yoke Gently o'er the accustomed oak. Sweet bird, that shunn'st the noise of folly, Most musical, most melancholy! Thee, chauntress, oft the woods among I woo, to hear thy even-song; And, missing thee, I walk unseen On the dry smooth-shaven green, To behold the wandering moon, Riding near her highest noon, Like one that had been led astray Through the heaven's wide pathless way, And oft, as if her head she bowed, Stooping through a fleecy cloud. Oft, on a plat of rising ground, I hear the far-off curfew sound, Over some wide-watered shore, Swinging slow with sullen roar; Or, if the air will not permit, Some still removed place will fit, Where glowing embers through the room Teach light to counterfeit a gloom, Far from all resort of mirth, Save the cricket on the hearth, Or the bellman's drowsy charm To bless the doors from nightly harm. Or let my lamp, at midnight hour, Be seen in some high lonely tower, With thrice great Hermes, or unsphere The spirit of Plato, to unfold What worlds or what vast regions hold The immortal mind that hath forsook Her mansion in this fleshly nook; And of those demons that are found In fire, air, flood, or underground, Whose power hath a true consent With planet or with element. Sometime let gorgeous Tragedy In sceptred pall come sweeping by, Presenting Thebes, or Pelops' line, Or the tale of Troy divine, Or what though rare of later age Ennobled hath the buskined stage. But, O sad Virgin! that thy power Might raise Musaeus from his bower; Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing Such notes as, warbled to the string, Drew iron tears down Pluto's cheek, And made Hell grant what love did seek; Or call up him that left half-told The story of Cambuscan bold, And who had Canace to wife, That owned the virtuous ring and glass, And of the wondrous horse of brass On which the Tartar king did ride; And if aught else great bards beside In sage and solemn tunes have sung, Of turneys, and of trophies hung, Of forests, and enchantments drear, Where more is meant than meets the ear. Thus, Night, oft see me in thy pale career, Till civil-suited Morn appear, Not tricked and frounced, as she was wont With the Attic boy to hunt, But kerchieft in a comely cloud While rocking winds are piping loud, Or ushered with a shower still, When the gust hath blown his fill, Ending on the rustling leaves, With minute-drops from off the eaves. And, when the sun begins to fling His flaring beams, me, Goddess, bring To arched walks of twilight groves, And shadows brown, that Sylvan loves, Of pine, or monumental oak, Where the rude axe with heaved stroke Was never heard the nymphs to daunt, Or fright them from their hallowed haunt. There, in close covert, by some brook, Where no profaner eye may look, Hide me from day's garish eye, While the bee with honeyed thigh, That at her flowery work doth sing, And the waters murmuring, With such consort as they keep, Entice the dewy-feathered Sleep. And let some strange mysterious dream Wave at his wings, in airy stream Of lively portraiture displayed, Softly on my eyelids laid; And, as I wake, sweet music breathe Above, about, or underneath, Sent by some Spirit to mortals good, Or the unseen Genius of the wood. But let my due feet never fail To walk the studious cloister's pale, And love the high embowed roof, With antique pillars massy proof, And storied windows richly dight, Casting a dim religious light. There let the pealing organ blow, To the full-voiced quire below, In service high and anthems clear, As may with sweetness, through mine ear, Dissolve me into ecstasies, And bring all Heaven before mine eyes. And may at last my weary age Find out the peaceful hermitage, The hairy gown and mossy cell, Where I may sit and rightly spell Of every star that heaven doth shew, And every herb that sips the dew, Till old experience do attain To something like prophetic strain. These pleasures, Melancholy, give; And I with thee will choose to live. My mansion is, where those immortal shapes Of bright aerial spirits live insphered In regions mild of calm and serene air, Above the smoke and stir of this dim spot Which men call Earth, and, with low-thoughted care, Confined and pestered in this pinfold here, Strive to keep up a frail and feverish being, Unmindful of the crown that Virtue gives, After this mortal change, to her true servants Amongst the enthroned gods on sainted seats. Yet some there be that by due steps aspire To lay their just hands on that golden key That opes the palace of eternity. To Such my errand is; and, but for such, I would not soil these pure ambrosial weeds With the rank vapours of this sin-worn mould. But to my task. Neptune, besides the sway Of every salt flood and each ebbing stream, Took in by lot, 'twixt high and nether Jove, Imperial rule of all the sea-girt isles That, like to rich and various gems, inlay The unadorned bosom of the deep; Which he, to grace his tributary gods, By course commits to several government, And gives them leave to wear their sapphire crowns And wield their little tridents. But this Isle, The greatest and the best of all the main, He quarters to his blue-haired deities; And all this tract that fronts the falling sun A noble Peer of mickle trust and power Has in his charge, with tempered awe to guide An old and haughty nation, proud in arms: Where his fair offspring, nursed in princely lore, Are coming to attend their father's state, And new-intrusted sceptre. But their way Lies through the perplexed paths of this drear wood, The nodding horror of whose shady brows Threats the forlorn and wandering passenger; And here their tender age might suffer peril, But that, by quick command from sovran Jove, I was despatched for their defence and guard: And listen why; for I will tell you now What never yet was heard in tale or song, From old or modern bard, in hall or bower. Bacchus, that first from out the purple grape Crushed the sweet poison of misused wine, After the Tuscan mariners transformed, Coasting the Tyrrhene shore, as the winds listed, On Circe's island fell. Who knows not Circe, The daughter of the Sun, whose charmed cup Whoever tasted lost his upright shape, And downward fell into a grovelling swine? This Nymph, that gazed upon his clustering locks, With ivy berries wreathed, and his blithe youth, Had by him, ere he parted thence, a son Much like his father, but his mother more, Whom therefore she brought up, and Comus named: Who, ripe and frolic of his full-grown age, Roving the Celtic and Iberian fields, At last betakes him to this ominous wood, And, in thick shelter of black shades imbowered, Excels his mother at her mighty art; Offering to every weary traveller His orient liquor in a crystal glass, To quench the drouth of Phoebus; which as they taste For most do taste through fond intemperate thirst , Soon as the potion works, their human count'nance, The express resemblance of the gods, is changed Into some brutish form of wolf or bear, Or ounce or tiger, hog, or bearded goat, All other parts remaining as they were. And they, so perfect is their misery, Not once perceive their foul disfigurement, But boast themselves more comely than before, And all their friends and native home forget, To roll with pleasure in a sensual sty. Therefore, when any favoured of high Jove Chances to pass through this adventurous glade, Swift as the sparkle of a glancing star I shoot from heaven, to give him safe convoy, As now I do. But first I must put off These my sky-robes, spun out of Iris' woof, And take the weeds and likeness of a swain That to the service of this house belongs, Who, with his soft pipe and smooth-dittied song, Well knows to still the wild winds when they roar, And hush the waving woods; nor of less faith And in this office of his mountain watch Likeliest, and nearest to the present aid Of this occasion. But I hear the tread Of hateful steps; I must be viewless now. The star that bids the shepherd fold Now the top of heaven doth hold; And the gilded car of day His glowing axle doth allay In the steep Atlantic stream; And the slope sun his upward beam Shoots against the dusky pole, Pacing toward the other goal Of his chamber in the east. Meanwhile, welcome joy and feast, Midnight shout and revelry, Tipsy dance and jollity. Braid your locks with rosy twine, Dropping odours, dropping wine. Rigour now is gone to bed; And Advice with scrupulous head, Strict Age, and sour Severity, With their grave saws, in slumber lie. We, that are of purer fire, Imitate the starry quire, Who, in their nightly watchful spheres, Lead in swift round the months and years. The sounds and seas, with all their finny drove, Now to the moon in wavering morrice move; And on the tawny sands and shelves Trip the pert fairies and the dapper elves. By dimpled brook and fountain-brim, The wood-nymphs, decked with daisies trim, Their merry wakes and pastimes keep: What hath night to do with sleep? Night hath better sweets to prove; Venus now wakes, and wakens Love. Come, let us our rights begin; 'T is only daylight that makes sin, Which these dun shades will ne'er report. Hail, goddess of nocturnal sport, Dark-veiled Cotytto, to whom the secret flame Of midnight torches burns! mysterious dame, That ne'er art called but when the dragon womb Of Stygian darkness spets her thickest gloom, And makes one blot of all the air! Stay thy cloudy ebon chair, Wherein thou ridest with Hecat', and befriend Us thy vowed priests, till utmost end Of all thy dues be done, and none left out, Ere the blabbing eastern scout, The nice Morn on the Indian steep, From her cabined loop-hole peep, And to the tell-tale Sun descry Our concealed solemnity. Come, knit hands, and beat the ground In a light fantastic round. Break off, break off! I feel the different pace Of some chaste footing near about this ground. Run to your shrouds within these brakes and trees; Our number may affright. Some virgin sure For so I can distinguish by mine art Benighted in these woods! Now to my charms, And to my wily trains: I shall ere long Be well stocked with as fair a herd as grazed About my mother Circe. Thus I hurl My dazzling spells into the spongy air, Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion, And give it false presentments, lest the place And my quaint habits breed astonishment, And put the damsel to suspicious flight; Which must not be, for that's against my course. I, under fair pretence of friendly ends, And well-placed words of glozing courtesy, Baited with reasons not unplausible, Wind me into the easy-hearted man, And hug him into snares. When once her eye Hath met the virtue of this magic dust, I shall appear some harmless villager Whom thrift keeps up about his country gear. But here she comes; I fairly step aside, And hearken, if I may her business hear. This way the noise was, if mine ear be true, My best guide now. Methought it was the sound Of riot and ill-managed merriment, Such as the jocund flute or gamesome pipe Stirs up among the loose unlettered hinds, When, for their teeming flocks and granges full, In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan, And thank the gods amiss. I should be loth To meet the rudeness and swilled insolence Of such late wassailers; yet, oh! where else Shall I inform my unacquainted feet In the blind mazes of this tangled wood? My brothers, when they saw me wearied out With this long way, resolving here to lodge Under the spreading favour of these pines, Stepped, as they said, to the next thicket-side To bring me berries, or such cooling fruit As the kind hospitable woods provide. They left me then when the grey-hooded Even, Like a sad votarist in palmer's weed, Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus' wain. But where they are, and why they came not back, Is now the labour of my thoughts. 'Tis likeliest They had engaged their wandering steps too far; And envious darkness, ere they could return, Had stole them from me. Else, O thievish Night, Why shouldst thou, but for some felonious end, In thy dark lantern thus close up the stars That Nature hung in heaven, and filled their lamps With everlasting oil to give due light To the misled and lonely traveller? This is the place, as well as I may guess, Whence even now the tumult of loud mirth Was rife, and perfect in my listening ear; Yet nought but single darkness do I find. What might this be? A thousand fantasies Begin to throng into my memory, Of calling shapes, and beckoning shadows dire, And airy tongues that syllable men's names On sands and shores and desert wildernesses. These thoughts may startle well, but not astound The virtuous mind, that ever walks attended By a strong siding champion, Conscience. O, welcome, pure-eyed Faith, white-handed Hope, Thou hovering angel girt with golden wings, And thou unblemished form of Chastity! I see ye visibly, and now believe That He, the Supreme Good, to whom all things ill Are but as slavish officers of vengeance, Would send a glistering guardian, if need were, To keep my life and honour unassailed. . . . Was I deceived, or did a sable cloud Turn forth her silver lining on the night? I did not err: there does a sable cloud Turn forth her silver lining on the night, And casts a gleam over this tufted grove. I cannot hallo to my brothers, but Such noise as I can make to be heard farthest I'll venture; for my new-enlivened spirits Prompt me, and they perhaps are not far off. Sweet Echo, sweetest nymph, that liv'st unseen Within thy airy shell By slow Meander's margent green, And in the violet-embroidered vale Where the love-lorn nightingale Nightly to thee her sad song mourneth well: Canst thou not tell me of a gentle pair That likest thy Narcissus are? O, if thou have Hid them in some flowery cave, Tell me but where, So may'st thou be translated to the skies, And give resounding grace to all Heaven's harmonies! Can any mortal mixture of earth's mould Breathe such divine enchanting ravishment? Sure something holy lodges in that breast, And with these raptures moves the vocal air To testify his hidden residence. How sweetly did they float upon the wings Of silence, through the empty-vaulted night, At every fall smoothing the raven down Of darkness till it smiled! I have oft heard My mother Circe with the Sirens three, Amidst the flowery-kirtled Naiades, Culling their potent herbs and baleful drugs, Who, as they sung, would take the prisoned soul, And lap it in Elysium: Scylla wept, And chid her barking waves into attention, And fell Charybdis murmured soft applause. Yet they in pleasing slumber lulled the sense, And in sweet madness robbed it of itself; But such a sacred and home-felt delight, Such sober certainty of waking bliss, I never heard till now. I'll speak to her, And she shall be my queen. Hail, foreign wonder! Whom certain these rough shades did never breed, Unless the goddess that in rural shrine Dwell'st here with Pan or Sylvan, by blest song Forbidding every bleak unkindly fog To touch the prosperous growth of this tall wood. Nay, gentle shepherd, ill is lost that praise That is addressed to unattending ears. Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift How to regain my severed company, Compelled me to awake the courteous Echo To give me answer from her mossy couch. What chance, good lady, hath bereft you thus? Dim darkness and this leafy labyrinth. Could that divide you from near-ushering guides? They left me weary on a grassy turf. By falsehood, or discourtesy, or why? To seek i' the valley some cool friendly spring. And left your fair side all unguarded, Lady? They were but twain, and purposed quick return. Perhaps forestalling night prevented them. How easy my misfortune is to hit! Imports their loss, beside the present need? No less than if I should my brothers lose. Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom? As smooth as Hebe's their unrazored lips. Two such I saw, what time the laboured ox In his loose traces from the furrow came, And the swinked hedger at his supper sat. I saw them under a green mantling vine, That crawls along the side of yon small hill, Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots; Their port was more than human, as they stood. I took it for a faery vision Of some gay creatures of the element, That in the colours of the rainbow live, And play i' the plighted clouds. I was awe-strook, And, as I passed, I worshiped. If those you seek, It were a journey like the path to Heaven To help you find them. Gentle villager, What readiest way would bring me to that place? Due west it rises from this shrubby point. To find out that, good shepherd, I suppose, In such a scant allowance of star-light, Would overtask the best land-pilot's art, Without the sure guess of well-practised feet. I know each lane, and every alley green, Dingle, or bushy dell, of this wild wood, And every bosky bourn from side to side, My daily walks and ancient neighbourhood; And, if your stray attendance be yet lodged, Or shroud within these limits, I shall know Ere morrow wake, or the low-roosted lark From her thatched pallet rouse. If otherwise, I can conduct you, Lady, to a low But loyal cottage, where you may be safe Till further quest. Shepherd, I take thy word, And trust thy honest-offered courtesy, Which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds, With smoky rafters, than in tapestry halls And courts of princes, where it first was named, And yet is most pretended. In a place Less warranted than this, or less secure, I cannot be, that I should fear to change it. Eye me, blest Providence, and square my trial To my proportioned strength! Shepherd, lead on. Unmuffle, ye faint stars; and thou, fair moon, That wont'st to love the traveller's benison, Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud, And disinherit Chaos, that reigns here In double night of darkness and of shades; Or, if your influence be quite dammed up With black usurping mists, some gentle taper, Though a rush-candle from the wicker hole Of some clay habitation, visit us With thy long levelled rule of streaming light, And thou shalt be our star of Arcady, Or, if our eyes Be barred that happiness, might we but hear The folded flocks, penned in their wattled cotes, Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops, Or whistle from the lodge, or village cock Count the night-watches to his feathery dames, 'T would be some solace yet, some little cheering, In this close dungeon of innumerous boughs. But, oh, that hapless virgin, our lost sister! Where may she wander now, whither betake her From the chill dew, amongst rude burs and thistles Perhaps some cold bank is her bolster now, Or 'gainst the rugged bark of some broad elm Leans her unpillowed head, fraught with sad fears. What if in wild amazement and affright, Or, while we speak, within the direful grasp Of savage hunger, or of savage heat! Peace, brother: be not over-exquisite To cast the fashion of uncertain evils; For, grant they be so, while they rest unknown, What need a man forestall his date of grief, And run to meet what he would most avoid? Or, if they be but false alarms of fear, How bitter is such self-delusion! I do not think my sister so to seek, Or so unprincipled in virtue's book, And the sweet peace that goodness bosoms ever, As that the single want of light and noise Not being in danger, as I trust she is not Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts, And put them into misbecoming plight. Virtue could see to do what Virtue would By her own radiant light, though sun and moon Were in the flat sea sunk. And Wisdom's self Oft seeks to sweet retired solitude, Where, with her best nurse, Contemplation, She plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings, That, in the various bustle of resort, Were all to-ruffled, and sometimes impaired. He that has light within his own clear breast May sit i' the centre, and enjoy bright day: But he that hides a dark soul and foul thoughts Benighted walks under the mid-day sun; Himself is his own dungeon. 'Tis most true That musing meditation most affects The pensive secrecy of desert cell, Far from the cheerful haunt of men and herds, And sits as safe as in a senate house For who would rob a hermit of his weeds, His few books, or his beads, or maple dish, Or do his grey hairs any violence? But Beauty, like the fair Hesperian tree Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard Of dragon-watch with unenchanted eye To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit, From the rash hand of bold Incontinence. You may as well spread out the unsunned heaps Of miser's treasure by an outlaw's den, And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope Danger will wink on Opportunity, And let a single helpless maiden pass Uninjured in this wild surrounding waste. Of night or loneliness it recks me not; I fear the dread events that dog them both, Lest some ill-greeting touch attempt the person Of our unowned sister. I do not, brother, Infer as if I thought my sister's state Secure without all doubt or controversy; Yet, where an equal poise of hope and fear Does arbitrate the event, my nature is That I incline to hope rather than fear, And gladly banish squint suspicion. My sister is not so defenceless left As you imagine; she has a hidden strength, Which you remember not. What hidden strength, Unless the strength of Heaven, if you mean that? I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength, Which, if Heaven gave it, may be termed her own. 'Tis chastity, my brother, chastity: She that has that is clad in complete steel, And, like a quivered nymph with arrows keen, May trace huge forests, and unharboured heaths, Infamous hills, and sandy perilous wilds; Where, through the sacred rays of chastity, No savage fierce, bandite, or mountaineer, Will dare to soil her virgin purity. Yea, there where very desolation dwells, By grots and caverns shagged with horrid shades, She may pass on with unblenched majesty, Be it not done in pride, or in presumption. Some say no evil thing that walks by night, In fog or fire, by lake or moorish fen, Blue meagre hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost, That breaks his magic chains at curfew time, No goblin or swart faery of the mine, Hath hurtful power o'er true virginity. Do ye believe me yet, or shall I call Antiquity from the old schools of Greece To testify the arms of chastity? Hence had the huntress Dian her dread bow Fair silver-shafted queen for ever chaste, Wherewith she tamed the brinded lioness And spotted mountain-pard, but set at nought The frivolous bolt of Cupid; gods and men Feared her stern frown, and she was queen o' the woods. What was that snaky-headed Gorgon shield That wise Minerva wore, unconquered virgin, Wherewith she freezed her foes to congealed stone, But rigid looks of chaste austerity, And noble grace that dashed brute violence With sudden adoration and blank awe? So dear to Heaven is saintly chastity That, when a soul is found sincerely so, A thousand liveried angels lackey her, Driving far off each thing of sin and guilt, And in clear dream and solemn vision Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear; Till oft converse with heavenly habitants Begin to cast a beam on the outward shape, The unpolluted temple of the mind, And turns it by degrees to the soul's essence, Till all be made immortal. But, when lust, By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk, But most by lewd and lavish act of sin, Lets in defilement to the inward parts, The soul grows clotted by contagion, Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite loose The divine property of her first being. Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp Oft seen in charnel-vaults and sepulchres, Lingering and sitting by a new-made grave, As loth to leave the body that it loved, And linked itself by carnal sensualty To a degenerate and degraded state. SEC. BRO. How charming is divine Philosophy! Not harsh and crabbed, as dull fools suppose, But musical as is Apollo's lute, And a perpetual feast of nectared sweets, Where no crude surfeit reigns. list! I hear Some far-off hallo break the silent air. SMethought so too; what should it be? For certain, Either some one, like us, night-foundered here, Or else some neighbour woodman, or, at worst, Some roving robber calling to his fellows. SEC. BRO. Heaven keep my sister! Again, again, and near! Best draw, and stand upon our guard. I'll hallo! If he be friendly, he comes well: if not, Defence is a good cause, and Heaven be for us! That hallo I should know. What are you? speak. Come not too near; you fall on iron stakes else. What voice is that? my young Lord? speak again. O brother, 't is my father's Shepherd, sure. Thyrsis! whose artful strains have oft delayed The huddling brook to hear his madrigal, And sweetened every musk-rose of the dale. How camest thou here, good swain? Hath any ram Slipped from the fold, or young kid lost his dam, Or straggling wether the pent flock forsook? How couldst thou find this dark sequestered nook? O my loved master's heir, and his next joy, I came not here on such a trivial toy As a strayed ewe, or to pursue the stealth Of pilfering wolf; not all the fleecy wealth That doth enrich these downs is worth a thought To this my errand, and the care it brought. But, oh! my virgin Lady, where is she? How chance she is not in your company? To tell thee sadly, Shepherd, without blame Or our neglect, we lost her as we came. Ay me unhappy! then my fears are true. What fears, good Thyrsis? Prithee briefly shew. I'll tell ye. 'T is not vain or fabulous Though so esteemed by shallow ignorance What the sage poets, taught by the heavenly Muse, Storied of old in high immortal verse Of dire Chimeras and enchanted isles, And rifted rocks whose entrance leads to Hell; For such there be, but unbelief is blind. Within the navel of this hideous wood, Immured in cypress shades, a sorcerer dwells, Of Bacchus and of Circe born, great Comus, Deep skilled in all his mother's witcheries, And here to every thirsty wanderer By sly enticement gives his baneful cup, With many murmurs mixed, whose pleasing poison The visage quite transforms of him that drinks, And the inglorious likeness of a beast Fixes instead, unmoulding reason's mintage Charactered in the face. This have I learnt Tending my flocks hard by i' the hilly crofts That brow this bottom glade; whence night by night He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl Like stabled wolves, or tigers at their prey, Doing abhorred rites to Hecate In their obscured haunts of inmost bowers. Yet have they many baits and guileful spells To inveigle and invite the unwary sense Of them that pass unweeting by the way. This evening late, by then the chewing flocks Had ta'en their supper on the savoury herb Of knot-grass dew-besprent, and were in fold, I sat me down to watch upon a bank With ivy canopied, and interwove With flaunting honeysuckle, and began, Wrapt in a pleasing fit of melancholy, To meditate my rural minstrelsy, Till fancy had her fill. But ere a close The wonted roar was up amidst the woods, And filled the air with barbarous dissonance; At which I ceased, and listened them awhile, Till an unusual stop of sudden silence Gave respite to the drowsy-flighted steeds That draw the litter of close-curtained Sleep. At last a soft and solemn-breathing sound Rose like a steam of rich distilled perfumes, And stole upon the air, that even Silence Was took ere she was ware, and wished she might Deny her nature, and be never more, Still to be so displaced. I was all ear, And took in strains that might create a soul Under the ribs of Death. But, oh! ere long Too well I did perceive it was the voice Of my most honoured Lady, your dear sister. Amazed I stood, harrowed with grief and fear; And O poor hapless nightingale, thought I, How sweet thou sing'st, how near the deadly snare! Then down the lawns I ran with headlong haste, Through paths and turnings often trod by day, Till, guided by mine ear, I found the place Where that damned wizard, hid in sly disguise For so by certain signs I knew , had met Already, ere my best speed could prevent, The aidless innocent lady, his wished prey; Who gently asked if he had seen such two, Supposing him some neighbour villager. Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guessed Ye were the two she meant; with that I sprung Into swift flight, till I had found you here; But further know I not. O night and shades, How are ye joined with hell in triple knot Against the unarmed weakness of one virgin, Alone and helpless! Is this the confidence You gave me, brother? Yes, and keep it still; Lean on it safely; not a period Shall be unsaid for me. Against the threats Of malice or of sorcery, or that power Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm: Virtue may be assailed, but never hurt, Surprised by unjust force, but not enthralled; Yea, even that which Mischief meant most harm Shall in the happy trial prove most glory. But evil on itself shall back recoil, And mix no more with goodness, when at last, Gathered like scum, and settled to itself, It shall be in eternal restless change Self-fed and self-consumed. If this fail, The pillared firmament is rottenness, And earth's base built on stubble. But come, let's on! Against the opposing will and arm of heaven May never this just sword be lifted up; But, for that damned magician, let him be girt With all the grisly legions that troop Under the sooty flag of Acheron, Harpies and Hydras, or all the monstrous forms 'Twixt Africa and Ind, I'll find him out, And force him to return his purchase back, Or drag him by the curls to a foul death, Cursed as his life. Alas! good venturous youth, I love thy courage yet, and bold emprise; But here thy sword can do thee little stead. Far other arms and other weapons must Be those that quell the might of hellish charms. He with his bare wand can unthread thy joints, And crumble all thy sinews. Why, prithee, How durst thou then thyself approach so near As to make this relation? Care and utmost shifts How to secure the Lady from surprisal Brought to my mind a certain shepherd lad, Of small regard to see to, yet well skilled In every virtuous plant and healing herb That spreads her verdant leaf to the morning ray. He loved me well, and oft would beg me sing; Which when I did, he on the tender grass Would sit, and hearken even to ecstasy, And in requital ope his leathern scrip, And show me simples of a thousand names, Telling their strange and vigorous faculties. Amongst the rest a small unsightly root, But of divine effect, he culled me out. The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it, But in another country, as he said, Bore a bright golden flower, but not in this soil: Unknown, and like esteemed, and the dull swain Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon; And yet more med'cinal is it than that Moly That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave. He called it Haemony, and gave it me, And bade me keep it as of sovran use 'Gainst all enchantments, mildew blast, or damp, Or ghastly Furies' apparition. I pursed it up, but little reckoning made, Till now that this extremity compelled. But now I find it true; for by this means I knew the foul enchanter, though disguised, Entered the very lime-twigs of his spells, And yet came off. If you have this about you As I will give you when we go , you may Boldly assault the necromancer's hall; Where if he be, with dauntless hardihood And brandished blade rush on him: break his glass, And shed the luscious liquor on the ground; But seize his wand. Though he and his curst crew Fierce sign of battle make, and menace high, Or, like the sons of Vulcan, vomit smoke, Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink. ELD. BRO. Thyrsis, lead on apace; I'll follow thee; And some good angel bear a shield before us! The Scene changes to a stately palace, set out with all manner of whom he offers his glass; which she puts by, and goes about to rise. Nay, Lady, sit. If I but wave this wand, Your nerves are all chained up in alabaster, And you a statue, or as Daphne was, Root-bound, that fled Apollo. Fool, do not boast. Thou canst not touch the freedom of my mind With all thy charms, although this corporal rind Thou hast immanacled while Heaven sees good. Why are you vexed, Lady? why do you frown? Here dwell no frowns, nor anger; from these gates Sorrow flies far. See, here be all the pleasures That fancy can beget on youthful thoughts, When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns Brisk as the April buds in primrose season. And first behold this cordial julep here, That flames and dances in his crystal bounds, With spirits of balm and fragrant syrups mixed. Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone Is of such power to stir up joy as this, To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst. Why should you be so cruel to yourself, And to those dainty limbs, which Nature lent For gentle usage and soft delicacy? But you invert the covenants of her trust, And harshly deal, like an ill borrower, With that which you received on other terms, Scorning the unexempt condition By which all mortal frailty must subsist, Refreshment after toil, ease after pain, That have been tired all day without repast, And timely rest have wanted. But, fair virgin, This will restore all soon. 'T will not, false traitor! 'T will not restore the truth and honesty That thou hast banished from thy tongue with lies. Was this the cottage and the safe abode Thou told'st me of? What grim aspects are these, These oughly-headed monsters? Mercy guard me! Hence with thy brewed enchantments, foul deceiver! Hast thou betrayed my credulous innocence With vizored falsehood and base forgery? And would'st thou seek again to trap me here With liquorish baits, fit to ensnare a brute? Were it a draught for Juno when she banquets, I would not taste thy treasonous offer. None But such as are good men can give good things; And that which is not good is not delicious To a well-governed and wise appetite. O foolishness of men! that lend their ears To those budge doctors of the Stoic fur, And fetch their precepts from the Cynic tub, Praising the lean and sallow Abstinence! Wherefore did Nature pour her bounties forth With such a full and unwithdrawing hand, Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks, Thronging the seas with spawn innumerable, But all to please and sate the curious taste? And set to work millions of spinning worms, That in their green shops weave the smooth-haired silk, To deck her sons; and, that no corner might Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loins She hutched the all-worshipped ore and precious gems, To store her children with. If all the world Should, in a pet of temperance, feed on pulse, Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but frieze, The All-giver would be unthanked, would be unpraised, Not half his riches known and yet despised; And we should serve him as a grudging master, Who would be quite surcharged with her own weight, And strangled with her waste fertility: The earth cumbered, and the winged air darked with plumes, The herds would over-multitude their lords; The sea o'erfraught would swell, and the unsought diamonds Would so emblaze the forehead of the deep, And so bestud with stars, that they below Would grow inured to light, and come at last To gaze upon the sun with shameless brows. List, Lady; be not coy, and be not cozened With that same vaunted name, Virginity. Beauty is Nature's coin; must not be hoarded, But must be current; and the good thereof Consists in mutual and partaken bliss, Unsavoury in the enjoyment of itself. If you let slip time, like a neglected rose It withers on the stalk with languished head. Beauty is Nature's brag, and must be shown In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities, Where most may wonder at the workmanship. It is for homely features to keep home; They had their name thence: coarse complexions And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply The sampler, and to tease the huswife's wool. What need a vermeil-tinctured lip for that, Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the morn? There was another meaning in these gifts; Think what, and be advised; you are but young yet. I had not thought to have unlocked my lips In this unhallowed air, but that this juggler Would think to charm my judgment, as mine eyes, Obtruding false rules pranked in reason's garb. I hate when vice can bolt her arguments And virtue has no tongue to check her pride. Impostor! do not charge most innocent Nature, As if she would her children should be riotous With her abundance. She, good cateress, Means her provision only to the good, That live according to her sober laws, And holy dictate of spare Temperance. If every just man that now pines with want Had but a moderate and beseeming share Of that which lewdly-pampered Luxury Now heaps upon some few with vast excess, Nature's full blessings would be well dispensed In unsuperfluous even proportion, And she no whit encumbered with her store; And then the Giver would be better thanked, His praise due paid: for swinish gluttony Ne'er looks to Heaven amidst his gorgeous feast, But with besotted base ingratitude Crams, and blasphemes his Feeder. Shall I go on Or have I said enow? To him that dares Arm his profane tongue with contemptuous words Against the sun-clad power of chastity Fain would I something say; yet to what end? Thou hast nor ear, nor soul, to apprehend The sublime notion and high mystery That must be uttered to unfold the sage And serious doctrine of Virginity; And thou art worthy that thou shouldst not know More happiness than this thy present lot. Enjoy your dear wit, and gay rhetoric, That hath so well been taught her dazzling fence; Thou art not fit to hear thyself convinced. Yet, should I try, the uncontrolled worth Of this pure cause would kindle my rapt spirits To such a flame of sacred vehemence And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake, Till all thy magic structures, reared so high, Were shattered into heaps o'er thy false head. She fables not. I feel that I do fear Her words set off by some superior power; And, though not mortal, yet a cold shuddering dew Dips me all o'er, as when the wrath of Jove Speaks thunder and the chains of Erebus To some of Saturn's crew. I must dissemble, And try her yet more strongly. Come, no more! This is mere moral babble, and direct Against the canon laws of our foundation. I must not suffer this; yet 't is but the lees And settlings of a melancholy blood. But this will cure all straight; one sip of this Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight Beyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste. What! have you let the false enchanter scape? O ye mistook; ye should have snatched his wand, And bound him fast. Without his rod reversed, And backward mutters of dissevering power, We cannot free the Lady that sits here In stony fetters fixed and motionless. Yet stay: be not disturbed; now I bethink me, Some other means I have which may be used, Which once of Meliboeus old I learnt, The soothest shepherd that e'er piped on plains. There is a gentle Nymph not far from hence, That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream: Sabrina is her name: a virgin pure; Whilom she was the daughter of Locrine, That had the sceptre from his father Brute. She, guiltless damsel, flying the mad pursuit Of her enraged stepdame, Guendolen, Commended her fair innocence to the flood That stayed her flight with his cross-flowing course. The water-nymphs, that in the bottom played, Held up their pearled wrists, and took her in, Bearing her straight to aged Nereus' hall; Who, piteous of her woes, reared her lank head, And gave her to his daughters to imbathe In nectared lavers strewed with asphodil, And through the porch and inlet of each sense Dropt in ambrosial oils, till she revived, And underwent a quick immortal change, Made Goddess of the river. Still she retains Her maiden gentleness, and oft at eve Visits the herds along the twilight meadows, Helping all urchin blasts, and ill-luck signs That the shrewd meddling elf delights to make, Which she with precious vialed liquors heals: For which the shepherds, at their festivals, Carol her goodness loud in rustic lays, And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream Of pansies, pinks, and gaudy daffodils. And, as the old swain said, she can unlock The clasping charm, and thaw the numbing spell, If she be right invoked in warbled song; For maidenhood she loves, and will be swift To aid a virgin, such as was herself, In hard-besetting need. This will I try, And add the power of some adjuring verse. Sabrina fair, Listen where thou art sitting Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave, In twisted braids of lilies knitting The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair; Listen for dear honour's sake, Goddess of the silver lake, Listen and save! Listen, and appear to us, In name of great Oceanus. By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace, And Tethys' grave majestic pace; By hoary Nereus' wrinkled look, And the Carpathian wizard's hook; By scaly Triton's winding shell, And old soothsaying Glaucus' spell; By Leucothea's lovely hands, And her son that rules the strands; By Thetis' tinsel-slippered feet, And the songs of Sirens sweet; By dead Parthenope's dear tomb, And fair Ligea's golden comb, Wherewith she sits on diamond rocks Sleeking her soft alluring locks; By all the Nymphs that nightly dance Upon thy streams with wily glance; Rise, rise, and heave thy rosy head From thy coral-paven bed, And bridle in thy headlong wave, Till thou our summons answered have. Listen and save! By the rushy-fringed bank, Where grows the willow and the osier dank, My sliding chariot stays, Thick set with agate, and the azurn sheen Of turkis blue, and emerald green, That in the channel strays; Whilst from off the waters fleet Thus I set my printless feet O'er the cowslip's velvet head, That bends not as I tread. Gentle swain, at thy request I am here! Goddess dear, We implore thy powerful hand To undo the charmed band Of true virgin here distressed Through the force and through the wile Of unblessed enchanter vile. Shepherd, 't is my office best To help ensnared chastity. Brightest Lady, look on me. Thus I sprinkle on thy breast Drops that from my fountain pure I have kept of precious cure; Thrice upon thy finger's tip, Thrice upon thy rubied lip: Next this marble venomed seat, Smeared with gums of glutinous heat, I touch with chaste palms moist and cold. Now the spell hath lost his hold; And I must haste ere morning hour To wait in Amphitrite's bower. Virgin, daughter of Locrine, Sprung of old Anchises' line, May thy brimmed waves for this Their full tribute never miss From a thousand petty rills, That tumble down the snowy hills: Summer drouth or singed air Never scorch thy tresses fair, Nor wet October's torrent flood Thy molten crystal fill with mud; May thy billows roll ashore The beryl and the golden ore; May thy lofty head be crowned With many a tower and terrace round, And here and there thy banks upon With groves of myrrh and cinnamon. Come, Lady; while Heaven lends us grace, Let us fly this cursed place, Lest the sorcerer us entice With some other new device. Not a waste or needless sound Till we come to holier ground. I shall be your faithful guide Through this gloomy covert wide; And not many furlongs thence Is your Father's residence, Where this night are met in state Many a friend to gratulate His wished presence, and beside All the swains that there abide With jigs and rural dance resort. We shall catch them at their sport, And our sudden coming there Will double all their mirth and cheer. Come, let us haste; the stars grow high, But Night sits monarch yet in the mid sky. Back, shepherds, back! Enough your play Till next sun-shine holiday. Here be, without duck or nod, Other trippings to be trod Of lighter toes, and such court guise As Mercury did first devise With the mincing Dryades On the lawns and on the leas. The second Song presents them to their Father and Mother. Noble Lord and Lady bright, I have brought ye new delight. Here behold so goodly grown Three fair branches of your own. Heaven hath timely tried their youth, Their faith, their patience, and their truth, And sent them here through hard assays With a crown of deathless praise, To triumph in victorious dance O'er sensual folly and intemperance. The dances ended, the SPIRIT epiloguizes. To the ocean now I fly, And those happy climes that lie Where day never shuts his eye, Up in the broad fields of the sky. There I suck the liquid air, All amidst the gardens fair Of Hesperus, and his daughters three That sing about the golden tree. Along the crisped shades and bowers Revels the spruce and jocund Spring; The Graces and the rosy-bosomed Hours Thither all their bounties bring. There eternal Summer dwells; And west winds with musky wing About the cedarn alleys fling Nard and cassia's balmy smells. Iris there with humid bow Waters the odorous banks, that blow Flowers of more mingled hue Than her purfled scarf can shew, And drenches with Elysian dew List, mortals, if your ears be true Beds of hyacinth and roses, Where young Adonis oft reposes, Waxing well of his deep wound, In slumber soft, and on the ground Sadly sits the Assyrian queen. But far above, in spangled sheen, Celestial Cupid, her famed son, advanced Holds his dear Psyche, sweet entranced After her wandering labours long, Till free consent the gods among Make her his eternal bride, And from her fair unspotted side Two blissful twins are to be born, Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn. But now my task is smoothly done: I can fly, or I can run, Quickly to the green earth's end, Where the bowed welkin slow doth bend, And from thence can soar as soon To the corners of the moon. Mortals, that would follow me, Love virtue; she alone is free. She can teach ye how to climb Higher than the sphery chime; Or, if Virtue feeble were, Heaven itself would stoop to her. In this Monody the author bewails a learned Friend, unfortunately by occasion, foretells the ruin of our corrupted Clergy, then in their height. YET once more, O ye laurels, and once more, Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere, I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude, And with forced fingers rude Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year. Bitter constraint and sad occasion dear Compels me to disturb your season due; For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime, Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer. Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme. He must not float upon his watery bier Unwept, and welter to the parching wind, Without the meed of some melodious tear. Begin, then, Sisters of the sacred well That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring; Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string. Hence with denial vain and coy excuse: So may some gentle Muse With lucky words favour my destined urn, And as he passes turn, And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud! For we were nursed upon the self-same hill, Fed the same flock, by fountain, shade, and rill; Together both, ere the high lawns appeared Under the opening eyelids of the Morn, We drove a-field, and both together heard What time the grey-fly winds her sultry horn, Battening our flocks with the fresh dews of night, Oft till the star that rose at evening bright Toward heaven's descent had sloped his westering wheel. Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute; Tempered to the oaten flute, Rough Satyrs danced, and Fauns with cloven heel From the glad sound would not be absent long; And old Damoetas loved to hear our song. But, oh! the heavy change, now thou art gone, Now thou art gone and never must return! Thee, Shepherd, thee the woods and desert caves, With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown, And all their echoes, mourn. The willows, and the hazel copses green, Shall now no more be seen Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays. As killing as the canker to the rose, Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze, Or frost to flowers, that their gay wardrobe wear, When first the white-thorn blows; Such, Lycidas, thy loss to shepherd's ear. Where were ye, Nymphs, when the remorseless deep Closed o'er the head of your loved Lycidas? For neither were ye playing on the steep Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie, Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high, Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream. Ay me! I fondly dream What could the Muse herself that Orpheus bore, The Muse herself, for her enchanting son, Whom universal nature did lament, When, by the rout that made the hideous roar, His gory visage down the stream was sent, Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore? Alas! what boots it with uncessant care To tend the homely, slighted, shepherd's trade, And strictly meditate the thankless Muse? Were it not better done, as others use, To sport with Amaryllis in the shade, Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair? Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise That last infirmity of noble mind To scorn delights and live laborious days; But, the fair guerdon when we hope to find, And think to burst out into sudden blaze, Comes the blind Fury with the abhorred shears, And slits the thin-spun life. But not the praise, Phoebus replied, and touched my trembling ears: Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil, Nor in the glistering foil Set off to the world, nor in broad rumour lies, But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes And perfect witness of all-judging Jove; As he pronounces lastly on each deed, Of so much fame in heaven expect thy meed. O fountain Arethuse, and thou honoured flood, Smooth-sliding Mincius, crowned with vocal reeds, That strain I heard was of a higher mood. But now my oat proceeds, And listens to the Herald of the Sea, That came in Neptune's plea. He asked the waves, and asked the felon winds, What hard mishap hath doomed this gentle swain? And questioned every gust of rugged wings That blows from off each beaked promontory. They knew not of his story; And sage Hippotades their answer brings, That not a blast was from his dungeon strayed: The air was calm, and on the level brine Sleek Panope with all her sisters played. It was that fatal and perfidious bark, Built in the eclipse, and rigged with curses dark, That sunk so low that sacred head of thine. Next, Camus, reverend sire, went footing slow, His mantle hairy, and his bonnet sedge, Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge Like to that sanguine flower inscribed with woe. Ah! who hath reft, quoth he, my dearest pledge? Last came, and last did go, Two massy keys he bore of metals twain. The golden opes, the iron shuts amain . He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake: How well could I have spared for thee, young swain, Enow of such as, for their bellies' sake, Creep, and intrude, and climb into the fold! Of other care they little reckoning make Than how to scramble at the shearers' feast, And shove away the worthy bidden guest. Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold A sheep-hook, or have learnt aught else the least That to the faithful herdman's art belongs! What recks it them? What need they? They are sped: And, when they list, their lean and flashy songs Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw; The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed, But, swoln with wind and the rank mist they draw, Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread; Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw Daily devours apace, and nothing said. But that two-handed engine at the door Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more. Return, Alpheus; the dread voice is past That shrunk thy streams; return Sicilian Muse, And call the vales, and bid them hither cast Their bells and flowerets of a thousand hues. Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use Of shades, and wanton winds, and gushing brooks, On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks, Throw hither all your quaint enamelled eyes, That on the green turf suck the honeyed showers, And purple all the ground with vernal flowers. Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies, The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine, The white pink, and the pansy freaked with jet, The glowing violet, The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine, With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head, And every flower that sad embroidery wears; Bid amaranthus all his beauty shed, And daffadillies fill their cups with tears, To strew the laureate hearse where Lycid lies. For so, to interpose a little ease, Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise, Ay me! whilst thee the shores and sounding seas Wash far away, where'er thy bones are hurled; Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides, Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world; Or whether thou, to our moist vows denied, Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old, Where the great Vision of the guarded mount Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold. Look homeward, Angel, now, and melt with ruth: And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth. Weep no more, woeful shepherds, weep no more, For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead, Sunk though he be beneath the watery floor. So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed, And yet anon repairs his drooping head, And tricks his beams, and with new-spangled ore Flames in the forehead of the morning sky: So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high, Through the dear might of Him that walked the waves, Where, other groves and other streams along, With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves, And hears the unexpressive nuptial song, In the blest kingdoms meek of joy and love. There entertain him all the Saints above, In solemn troops, and sweet societies, That Sing, and singing in their glory move, And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes. Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more; Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore, In thy large recompense, and shalt be good To all that wander in that perilous flood. Thus sang the uncouth swain to the oaks and rills, While the still morn went out with sandals grey: He touched the tender stops of various quills, With eager thought warbling his Doric lay: And now the sun had stretched out all the hills, And now was dropt into the western bay. At last he rose, and twitched his mantle blue: Tomorrow to fresh woods, and pastures new. <|endofpoem|> Love acts the tennis-player's part, And throws to thee my panting heart; Heliodora! ere it fall, Let desire catch swift the ball: Let her in the ball-court move, Follow in the game with love. If thou throw me back again, I shall of foul play complain. Oh, shrill-voiced insect that, with dew-drops sweet Inebriate, dost in desert woodlands sing. Drunk ev'ry night with a delicious tear, Dropped thee from heaven. The Son begins to rise, the Father's set: Heav'n took away one light, and pleas'd to let Another rise. Quarles, thy light's divine, And it shall teach Darkness it self to shine. Each word revives thy Father's name, his art Is well imprinted in thy noble heart. I've read thy pleasing lines, wherein I find The rare Endeavors of a modest mind. Proceed as well as thou hast well begun, The Gatehouse for a Prison was ordain'd, When in this land the third king EDWARD reign'd: Good lodging roomes, and diet it affords, But I had rather lye at home on boords. What distaste could drive thee hence, Where so much delight did reign, Sateing ev'n the soul of sense? And though thou unkind hast prov'd, Never youth was more belov'd. Then, lov'd Adonis, come away, For Venus brooks not thy delay. Wert thou sated with the spoil Of so many virgin hearts, And therefore didst change thy soil, To seek fresh in other parts? Dangers wait on foreign game; We have deer more sound and tame. Then, lov'd Adonis, come away, For Venus brooks not thy delay. Phillis, fed with thy delights, In thy absence pines away; And love, too, hath lost his rites, Not one lass keeps holiday. They have changed their mirth for cares, And do onely sigh thy airs. Then, lov'd Adonis, come away, For Venus brooks not thy delay. Elpine, in whose sager looks Thou wert wont to take delight, Hath forsook his drink and books, 'Cause he can't enjoy thy sight: He hath laid his learning by, 'Cause his wit wants company. Then, lov'd Adonis, come away, For friendship brooks not thy delay. All the swains that once did use To converse with Love and thee, In the language of thy Muse, Have forgot Love's deity: They deny to write a line, And do only talk of thine. Then, lov'd Adonis, come away, For friendship brooks not thy delay. By thy sweet Althea's voice, We conjure thee to return; Or we'll rob thee of that choice, In whose flames each heart would burn: That inspir'd by her and sack, Such company we will not lack: That poets in the age to come, Shall write of our Elisium. 'Nor is it fit that more I should acquaint, Lest men adore in one A Scholar, SOULDIER, Lover, and a Saint.' and are to be sold To the richest Treasury That e'er fill'd ambitious eye; To the faire bright Magazin Hath impoverisht Love's Queen; To th' Exchequer of all honour All take pensions but from her ; To the taper of the thore Which the god himselfe but bore; Let me cast the Drop I write. And as at Loretto's shrine Caesar shovels in his mine, Th' Empres spreads her carkanets, The lords submit their coronets, Knights their chased armes hang by, Maids diamond-ruby fancies tye; Whilst from the pilgrim she wears One poore false pearl, but ten true tears: So among the Orient prize, Saphyr-onyx eulogies Offer'd up unto your fame, Take my GARNET-DUBLET name, And vouchsafe 'midst those rich joyes With devotion these TOYES. Now y' have oblieg'd the age, thy wel known worth Is to our joy auspiciously brought forth. Good morrow to thy son, thy first borne flame Which, as thou gav'st it birth, stamps it a name, That Fate and a discerning age shall set Why then needs all this paines, those season'd pens, That standing lifeguard to a booke kinde friends , That with officious care thus guard thy gate, As if thy Child were illigitimate? Forgive their freedome, since unto their praise They write to give, not to dispute thy bayes. As when some glorious queen, whose pregnant wombe Brings forth a kingdome with her first-borne Sonne, Marke but the subjects joyfull hearts and eyes: Some offer gold, and others sacrifice; This slayes a lambe, that, not so rich as hee, Brings but a dove, this but a bended knee; And though their giftes be various, yet their sence Speaks only this one thought, Long live the prince. So, my best brother, if unto your name I offer up a thin blew-burning flame, Pardon my love, since none can make thee shine, Vnlesse they kindle first their torch at thine. Then as inspir'd, they boldly write, nay that, Which their amazed lights but twinkl'd at, And their illustrate thoughts doe voice this right, Lucasta held their torch; thou gav'st it light. En puer Idalius tremulis circumvolat alis, Quem prope sedentem castior uret amor. Lampada sic videas circumvolitare Pyrausta, Cui contingenti est flamma futura rogus. Ergo procul fugias, Lector, cui nulla placebunt Carmina, ni fuerint turpia, spurca, nigra. Sacrificus Romae lustralem venditat undam: Castior est illa Castalis unda mihi: Limpida, et , nulla putredine spissa, Scilicet ex puro defluit illa jugo. Ex pura veniunt tam dia poemata mente, Cui scelus est Veneris vel tetigisse fores. How humble is thy muse Deare that can daign Such servants as my pen to entertaine! When all the sonnes of wit glory to be Clad in thy muses gallant livery. I shall disgrace my master, prove a staine, And no addition to his honour'd traine; Though all that read me will presume to swear I neer read thee: yet if it may appear, I love the writer and admire the writ, I my owne want betray, not wrong thy wit. Did thy worke want a prayse, my barren brain Could not afford it: my attempt were vaine. It needs no foyle: All that ere writ before, Are foyles to thy faire Poems, and no more. Then to be lodg'd in the same sheets with thine, May prove disgrace to yours, but grace to mine. Deare Lovelace, I am now about to prove I cannot write a verse, but can write love. On such a subject as thy booke I coo'd Write books much greater, but not half so good. But as the humble tenant, that does bring A chicke or egges for's offering, Is tane into the buttry, and does fox Equall with him that gave a stalled oxe: So since the heart of ev'ry cheerfull giver Makes pounds no more accepted than a stiver , Though som thy prayse in rich stiles sing, I may In stiver-stile write love as well as they. I write so well that I no criticks feare; For who'le read mine, when as thy booke's so neer, Vnlesse thy selfe? then you shall secure mine From those, and Ile engage my selfe for thine. They'l do't themselves; this allay you'l take, I love thy book, and yet not for thy sake. So from the pregnant braine of Jove did rise Pallas, the queene of wit and beautious eyes, As faire Lucasta from thy temples flowes, Temples no lesse ingenious then Joves. Alike in birth, so shall she be in fame, And be immortall to preserve thy Name. Now, when the wars augment our woes and fears, And the shrill noise of drums oppresse our ears; Now peace and safety from our shores are fled To holes and cavernes to secure their head; Now all the graces from the land are sent, And the nine Muses suffer banishment; Whence spring these raptures? whence this heavenly rime, So calme and even in so harsh a time? Well might that charmer his faire Caelia crowne, And that more polish't Tyterus renowne His Sacarissa, when in groves and bowres They could repose their limbs on beds of flowrs: When wit had prayse, and merit had reward, And every noble spirit did accord To love the Muses, and their priests to raise, And interpale their browes with flourishing bayes; But in a time distracted so to sing, When peace is hurried hence on rages wing, When the fresh bayes are from the Temple torne, And every art and science made a scorne; Then to raise up, by musicke of thy art, Our drooping spirits and our grieved hearts; Then to delight our souls, and to inspire Our breast with pleasure from thy charming lyre; Then to divert our sorrowes by thy straines, Making us quite forget our seven yeers paines In the past wars, unlesse that Orpheus be A sharer in thy glory: for when he Descended downe for his Euridice, He stroke his lute with like admired art, And made the damned to forget their smart. He that doth paint the beauties of your verse, Must use your pensil, be polite, soft, terse; Forgive that man whose best of art is love, If he no equall master to you prove. My heart is all my eloquence, and that Speaks sharp affection, when my words fall flat; I reade you like my mistresse, and discry In every line the quicknesse of her eye: Her smoothnesse in each syllable, her grace To marshall ev'ry word in the right place. It is the excellence and soule of wit, When ev'ry thing is free as well as fit: For metaphors packt up and crowded close Swath ye minds sweetnes, and display the throws, And, like those chickens hatcht in furnaces, Produce or one limbe more, or one limbe lesse Then nature bids. Survey such when they write, No clause but's justl'd with an epithite. So powerfully you draw when you perswade, Passions in you in us are vertues made; Such is the magick of that lawfull shell That where it doth but talke, it doth compell: For no Apelles 'till this time e're drew A Venus to the waste so well as you. and a friend of poets, and as a warm advocate of Episcopacy. The world shall now no longer mourne nor vex For th' obliquity of a cross-grain'd sex; Nor beauty swell above her bankes, and made For ornament the universe invade So fiercely, that 'tis question'd in our bookes, Whether kils most the Amazon's sword or lookes. Lucasta in loves game discreetly makes Women and men joyntly to share the stakes, And lets us know, when women scorne, it is Mens hot love makes the antiparisthesis; And a lay lover here such comfort finds As Holy Writ gives to affected minds. The wilder nymphs, lov's power could not comand, Are by thy almighty numbers brought to hand, And flying Daphnes, caught, amazed vow They never heard Apollo court till now. 'Tis not by force of armes this feat is done, For that would puzzle even the Knight o' th' Sun; But 'tis by pow'r of art, and such a way As Orpheus us'd, when he made fiends obay. Ovr times are much degenerate from those, Which your sweet Muse, which your fair fortune chose; And as complexions alter with the climes, Our wits have drawne th' infection of our times. That candid age no other way could tell To be ingenious, but by speaking well. Who best could prayse, had then the greatest prayse; 'Twas more esteemd to give then wear the bayes. Modest ambition studi'd only then To honour not her selfe, but worthy men. These vertues now are banisht out of towne, Our Civill Wars have lost the civicke crowne. He highest builds, who with most art destroys, And against others fame his owne employs. I see the envious caterpillar sit On the faire blossome of each growing wit. The ayre's already tainted with the swarms Of insects, which against you rise in arms. Word-peckers, paper-rats, book-scorpions, Of wit corrupted the unfashion'd sons. The barbed censurers begin to looke Like the grim Consistory on thy booke; And on each line cast a reforming eye Severer then the yong presbytery. Till, when in vaine they have thee all perus'd, You shall for being faultlesse be accus'd. Some reading your LUCASTA will alledge You wrong'd in her the Houses priviledge; Some that you under sequestration are, Because you write when going to the Warre; And one the book prohibits, because Kent Their first Petition by the Authour sent. But when the beauteous ladies came to know, That their deare Lovelace was endanger'd so: Lovelace, that thaw'd the most congealed brest, He who lov'd best, and them defended best, Whose hand so rudely grasps the steely brand, Whose hand so gently melts the ladies hand, They all in mutiny, though yet undrest, Sally'd, and would in his defence contest. And one, the loveliest that was yet e're seen, Thinking that I too of the rout had been, Mine eyes invaded with a female spight She knew what pain 't would be to lose that sight . O no, mistake not, I reply'd: for I In your defence, or in his cause, would dy. But he, secure of glory and of time, Above their envy or mine aid doth clime. Him valianst men and fairest nymphs approve, His booke in them finds judgement, with you, love. If the desire of glory speak a mind More nobly operative and more refin'd, What vast soule moves thee, or what hero's spirit Kept in'ts traduction pure dost thou inherit, That, not contented with one single fame, Dost to a double glory spread thy name, And on thy happy temples safely set Both th' Delphick wreath and civic coronet? Was't not enough for us to know how far Thou couldst in season suffer, act and dare But we must also witnesse, with what height And what Ionick sweetnesse thou canst write, And melt those eager passions, that are Stubborn enough t' enrage the god of war Into a noble love, which may expire In an illustrious pyramid of fire; Which, having gained his due station, may Fix there, and everlasting flames display. This is the braver path: time soone can smother The dear-bought spoils and tropheis of the other. How many fiery heroes have there been, Whose triumphs were as soone forgot as seen? Because they wanted some diviner one To rescue from night, and make known. Such art thou to thy selfe. While others dream Strong flatt'ries on a fain'd or borrow'd theam, Thou shalt remaine in thine owne lustre bright, And adde unto 't LUCASTA'S chaster light. For none so fit to sing great things as he, That can act o're all lights of poetry. Thus had Achilles his owne gests design'd, He had his genius Homer far outshin'd. Compar'd with fancy and imagination; The one paints shadowed persons in pure kind , The other paints the pictures of the mind In purer verse. And as rare Zeuxes fame Shin'd, till Apelles art eclips'd the same By a more exquisite and curious line In Zeuxeses with pensill far more fine , So have our modern poets late done well, Till thine appear'd which scarce have paralel . They like to Zeuxes grapes beguile the sense, But thine do ravish the intelligence, Like the rare banquet of Apelles, drawn, And covered over with most curious lawn. Thus if thy careles draughts are cal'd the best, What would thy lines have beene, had'st thou profest That faculty infus'd of poetry, Which adds such honour unto thy chivalry? Doubtles thy verse had all as far transcended As Sydneyes Prose, who Poets once defended. For when I read thy much renowned pen, My fancy there finds out another Ben In thy brave language, judgement, wit, and art, Of every piece of thine, in every part: Where thy seraphique Sydneyan fire is raised high In valour, vertue, love, and loyalty. Virgil was styl'd the loftiest of all, Ovid the smoothest and most naturall; Martiall concise and witty, quaint and pure, Iuvenall grave and learned, though obscure. But all these rare ones which I heere reherse, Do live againe in Thee, and in thy Verse: Although not in the language of their time, Yet in a speech as copious and sublime. The rare Apelles in thy picture wee Perceive, and in thy soule Apollo see. Wel may each Grace and Muse then crown thy praise With Mars his banner and Minerva's bayes. Chast as Creation meant us, and more bright Then the first day in 's uneclipsed light, Is thy LUCASTA; and thou offerest heere Lines to her name as undefil'd and cleere; Such as the first indeed more happy dayes When vertue, wit, and learning wore the bayes Now vice assumes would to her memory give: A Vestall flame that should for ever live, Plac't in a christal temple, rear'd to be The Embleme of her thoughts integrity; And on the porch thy name insculpt, my friend, Whose love, like to the flame, can know no end. The marble step that to the alter brings The hallowed priests with their clean offerings, Shall hold their names that humbly crave to be Votaries to th' shrine, and grateful friends to thee. So shal we live although our offrings prove Meane to the world for ever by thy love. Ile doe my nothing too, and try To dabble to thy memory. Not that I offer to thy name Encomiums of thy lasting fame. Those by the landed have been writ: Mine's but a yonger-brother wit; A wit that's hudled up in scarres, Borne like my rough selfe in the warres; And as a Squire in the fight Serves only to attend the Knight, So 'tis my glory in this field, Where others act, to beare thy shield. Enough, enough of orbs and spheres, Reach me a trumpet or a drum, To sound sharp synnets in your ears, And beat a deep encomium. I know not th' Eight Intelligence: Those that do understand it, pray Let them step hither, and from thence Speak what they all do sing or say: Nor what your diapasons are, Your sympathies and symphonies; To me they seem as distant farre As whence they take their infant rise. But I've a grateful heart can ring A peale of ordnance to your praise, And volleys of small plaudits bring To clowd a crown about your baies. Though laurel is thought thunder free, That storms and lightning disallows, Yet Caesar thorough fire and sea Snatches her to twist his conquering brows. And now me thinks like him you stand I' th' head of all the Poets' hoast, Whilest with your words you do command, They silent do their duty boast. Which done, the army ecchoes o're, Like Gamble Ios one and all, And in their various notes implore, Long live our noble Generall. If to be absent were to be Away from thee; Or that when I am gone, You or I were alone; Then my LUCASTA might I crave Pity from blustring winde or swallowing wave. But I'le not sigh one blast or gale To swell my saile, Or pay a teare to swage The foaming blew-gods rage; For whether he will let me passe Or no, I'm still as happy as I was. Though seas and land betwixt us both, Our faith and troth, Like separated soules, All time and space controules: Above the highest sphere wee meet, Unseene, unknowne, and greet as angels greet So then we doe anticipate Our after-fate, And are alive i'th' skies, If thus our lips and eyes Can speake like spirits unconfin'd In Heav'n, their earthy bodies left behind. Tell me not, sweet, I am unkinde, That from the nunnerie Of thy chaste breast and quiet minde To warre and armes I flie. True: a new Mistresse now I chase, The first foe in the field; And with a stronger faith imbrace A sword, a horse, a shield. Yet this inconstancy is such, As you too shall adore; I could not love thee, dear, so much, Lov'd I not Honour more. Tis true the beauteous Starre To which I first did bow Burnt quicker, brighter far, Than that which leads me now; Which shines with more delight, For gazing on that light So long, neere lost my sight. Through foul we follow faire, For had the world one face, And earth been bright as ayre, We had knowne neither place. Indians smell not their neast; A Swisse or Finne tastes best The spices of the East. So from the glorious Sunne Who to his height hath got, With what delight we runne To some black cave or grot! And, heav'nly Sydney you Twice read, had rather view Some odde romance so new. The god, that constant keepes Unto his deities, Is poore in joyes, and sleepes Imprison'd in the skies. This knew the wisest, who From Juno stole, below To love a bear or cow. For now the fragrant East, The spicery o' th' world, Hath hurl'd A rosie tincture o'er the Phoenix nest. Amarantha sweet and faire, Ah brade no more that shining haire! As my curious hand or eye, Hovering round thee, let it flye. Let it flye as unconfin'd As it's calme ravisher, the winde, Who hath left his darling, th' East, To wanton o're that spicie neast. Ev'ry tresse must be confest: But neatly tangled at the best; Like a clue of golden thread, Most excellently ravelled. Doe not then winde up that light In ribands, and o'er-cloud in night, Like the sun in's early ray; But shake your head, and scatter day. See, 'tis broke! within this grove, The bower and the walkes of love, Weary lye we downe and rest, And fanne each other's panting breast. Heere wee'll strippe and coole our fire, In creame below, in milk-baths higher: And when all wells are drawne dry, I'll drink a teare out of thine eye. Which our very joys shall leave, That sorrowes thus we can deceive; Or our very sorrowes weepe, That joyes so ripe so little keepe. Bright Bethsabe shall wash in David's bower, In water mix'd with purest almond flower, And bathe her beauty in the milk of kids. Depose your finger of that ring, And crowne mine with't awhile; Now I restor't. Pray, dos it bring Back with it more of soile? Or shines it not as innocent, As honest, as before 'twas lent? So then inrich me with that treasure, 'Twill but increase your store, And please me faire one with that pleasure Must please you still the more. Not to save others is a curse The blackest, when y'are ne're the worse. Sweet serene skye-like flower, Haste to adorn her bower; From thy long clowdy bed Shoot forth thy damaske head. New-startled blush of FLORA! The griefe of pale AURORA, Who will contest no more, Haste, haste, to strowe her floore. Vermilion ball, that's given Loves couches cover-led, Haste, haste, to make her bed. Dear offspring of pleas'd VENUS, And jollie plumpe SILENUS; Haste, haste, to decke the haire, Of th' only sweetly faire. See! rosie is her bower, Her floore is all this flower; Her bed a rosie nest By a bed of roses prest. But early as she dresses, Why fly you her bright tresses? Ah! I have found, I feare; Because her cheekes are neere. Then if thy voice commingle with the string, I hear in thee the rare Laniere to sing, now before me, this word is omitted. The childish god of love did sweare Thus: By my awfull bow and quiver, Yon' weeping, kissing, smiling pair, I'le scatter all their vowes i' th' ayr, And their knit imbraces shiver. Up then to th' head with his best art Full of spite and envy blowne, At her constant marble heart, He drawes his swiftest surest dart, Which bounded back, and hit his owne. Now the prince of fires burnes; Flames in the luster of her eyes; Triumphant she, refuses, scornes; He submits, adores and mournes, And is his votresse sacrifice. Foolish boy! resolve me now What 'tis to sigh and not be heard? He weeping kneel'd, and made a vow: The world shall love as yon' fast two; So on his sing'd wings up he steer'd. Ah me! the little tyrant theefe! As once my heart was playing, He snatcht it up and flew away, Laughing at all my praying. Proud of his purchase, he surveys And curiously sounds it, And though he sees it full of wounds, Cruel one, still he wounds it. And now this heart is all his sport, Which as a ball he boundeth From hand to breast, from breast to lip, And all its rest confoundeth. Then as a top he sets it up, And pitifully whips it; Sometimes he cloathes it gay and fine, Then straight againe he strips it. He cover'd it with false reliefe, Which gloriously show'd it; And for a morning-cushionet On's mother he bestow'd it. Each day, with her small brazen stings, A thousand times she rac'd it; But then at night, bright with her gemmes, Once neere her breast she plac'd it. There warme it gan to throb and bleed; She knew that smart, and grieved; At length this poore condemned heart With these rich drugges repreeved. She washt the wound with a fresh teare, Which my LUCASTA dropped, And in the sleave-silke of her haire 'Twas hard bound up and wrapped. She proab'd it with her constancie, And found no rancor nigh it; Only the anger of her eye Had wrought some proud flesh by it. Then prest she narde in ev'ry veine, Which from her kisses trilled; And with the balme heald all its paine, That from her hand distilled. But yet this heart avoyds me still, Will not by me be owned; But's fled to its physitian's breast; There proudly sits inthroned. Yet having opportunity, he tries, Gets her goodwill, and with his purchase flies. Soft, like floss. Heark! Oh heark! you guilty trees, In whose gloomy galleries Was the cruell'st murder done, That e're yet eclipst the sunne. Be then henceforth in your twigges Blasted, e're you sprout to sprigges; Feele no season of the yeere, But what shaves off all your haire, Nor carve any from your wombes Ought but coffins and their tombes. Here, here, oh here! EURIDICE, Here was she slaine; Her soule 'still'd through a veine: The gods knew lesse That time divinitie, Then ev'n, ev'n these Of brutishnesse. Oh! could you view the melodie Of ev'ry grace, And musick of her face, You'd drop a teare, Seeing more harmonie In her bright eye, Then now you heare. We that are ORPHEUS' sons, and can inherit By that great title taking his part in musical entertainments. The nameless charms unmark'd by her alone; The light of love, the purity of grace, The mind, the music breathing from her face. TELL me, ALEXIS, what this parting is, That so like dying is, but is not it? It is a swounding for a while from blisse, 'Till kind HOW DOE YOU call's us from the fit. If then the spirits only stray, let mine Fly to thy bosome, and my soule to thine: Thus in our native seate we gladly give Our right for one, where we can better live. But ah, this ling'ring, murdring farewel! Death quickly wounds, and wounding cures the ill. It is the glory of a valiant lover, Still to be dying, still for to recover. Soldiers suspected of their courage goe, That ensignes and their breasts untorne show: Love nee're his standard, when his hoste he sets, Creates alone fresh-bleeding bannerets. But part we, when thy figure I retaine Still in my heart, still strongly in mine eye? Shadowes no longer than the sun remaine, But his beams, that made 'em, fly, they fly. Vaine dreames of love! that only so much blisse Allow us, as to know our wretchednesse; And deale a larger measure in our paine By showing joy, then hiding it againe. No, whilst light raigns, LUCASTA still rules here, And all the night shines wholy in this sphere. I know no morne but my ALEXIS ray, To my dark thoughts the breaking of the day. So in each other if the pitying sun Thus keep us fixt, nere may his course be run! And oh! if night us undivided make; Let us sleepe still, and sleeping never wake! The close. Cruel ADIEUS may well adjourne awhile The sessions of a looke, a kisse, or smile, And leave behinde an angry grieving blush; But time nor fate can part us joyned thus. When I by thy faire shape did sweare, And mingled with each vowe a teare, I lov'd, I lov'd thee best, I swore as I profest. For all the while you lasted warme and pure, My oathes too did endure. But once turn'd faithlesse to thy selfe and old, They then with thee incessantly grew cold. I swore my selfe thy sacrifice By th' ebon bowes that guard thine eyes, Which now are alter'd white, And by the glorious light Of both those stars, which of their spheres bereft, Only the gellie's left. Then changed thus, no more I'm bound to you, Then swearing to a saint that proves untrue. Lucasta wept, and still the bright Inamour'd god of day, With his soft handkercher of light, Kist the wet pearles away. But when her teares his heate or'ecame, In cloudes he quensht his beames, And griev'd, wept out his eye of flame, So drowned her sad streames. At this she smiled, when straight the sun Cleer'd by her kinde desires; And by her eyes reflexion Fast kindl'd there his fires. Long in thy shackels, liberty I ask not from these walls, but thee; Left for awhile anothers bride, To fancy all the world beside. Yet e're I doe begin to love, See, how I all my objects prove; Then my free soule to that confine, 'Twere possible I might call mine. First I would be in love with PEACE, And her rich swelling breasts increase; But how, alas! how may that be, Despising earth, she will love me? Faine would I be in love with WAR, As my deare just avenging star; But War is lov'd so ev'rywhere, Ev'n he disdaines a lodging here. Thee and thy wounds I would bemoane, Faire thorough-shot RELIGION; But he lives only that kills thee, And who so bindes thy hands, is free. I would love a PARLIAMENT As a maine prop from Heav'n sent; But ah! who's he, that would be wedded To th' fairest body that's beheaded? Next would I court my LIBERTY, And then my birth-right, PROPERTY; But can that be, when it is knowne, There's nothing you can call your owne? A REFORMATION I would have, As for our griefes a SOV'RAIGNE salve; That is, a cleansing of each wheele Of state, that yet some rust doth feele. But not a reformation so, As to reforme were to ore'throw, Like watches by unskilfull men Disjoynted, and set ill againe. The PUBLICK FAITH I would adore, But she is banke-rupt of her store: Nor how to trust her can I see, For she that couzens all, must me. Since then none of these can be Fit objects for my love and me; What then remaines, but th' only spring Of all our loves and joyes, the King? He who, being the whole ball Of day on earth, lends it to all; When seeking to ecclipse his right, Blinded we stand in our owne light. And now an universall mist Of error is spread or'e each breast, With such a fury edg'd as is Not found in th' inwards of th' abysse. Oh, from thy glorious starry waine Dispense on me one sacred beame, To light me where I soone may see How to serve you, and you trust me! A nephew that dares COZEN any sin; Old MACHAVIEL and half a thousand other; Which, when subscrib'd, writes LEGION, names on truss, Eastrich! thou featherd foole, and easie prey, That larger sailes to thy broad vessell needst; Snakes through thy guttur-neck hisse all the day, Then on thy iron messe at supper feedst. O what a glorious transmigration From this to so divine an edifice Hast thou straight made! heere from a winged stone Transform'd into a bird of paradice! Now doe thy plumes for hiew and luster vie With th' arch of heav'n that triumphs or'e past wet, And in a rich enamel'd pinion lye With saphyres, amethists and opalls set. Sometime they wing her side, strive to drown The day's eyes piercing beames, whose am'rous heat Sollicites still, 'till with this shield of downe From her brave face his glowing fires are beat. But whilst a plumy curtaine she doth draw, A chrystall mirror sparkles in thy breast, In which her fresh aspect when as she saw, And then her foe retired to the west. Deare engine, that oth' sun got'st me the day, 'Spite of his hot assaults mad'st him retreat! No wind said she dare with thee henceforth play But mine own breath to coole the tyrants heat. My lively shade thou ever shalt retaine In thy inclosed feather-framed glasse, And but unto our selves to all remaine Invisible, thou feature of this face! So said, her sad swaine over-heard and cried: Yee Gods! for faith unstaind this a reward! Feathers and glasse t'outweigh my vertue tryed! Ah! show their empty strength! the gods accord. Now fall'n the brittle favourite lyes and burst! Amas'd LUCASTA weepes, repents and flies To her ALEXIS, vowes her selfe acurst, If hence she dresse her selfe but in his eyes. Yee happy floods! that now must passe The sacred conduicts of her wombe, Smooth and transparent as your face, Be proud! and if your waters be Foul'd with a counterfeyted teare, Or some false sigh hath stained yee, Haste, and be purified there. And when her rosie gates y'have trac'd, Continue yet some Orient wet, 'Till, turn'd into a gemme, y'are plac'd Like diamonds with rubies set. Yee drops, that dew th' Arabian bowers, Tell me, did you e're smell or view On any leafe of all your flowers Soe sweet a sent, so rich a hiew? But as through th' Organs of her breath You trickle wantonly, beware: Ambitious Seas in their just death As well as Lovers, must have share. And see! you boyle as well as I; You, that to coole her did aspire, Now troubled and neglected lye, Nor can your selves quench your owne fire. Yet still be happy in the thought, That in so small a time as this, Through all the Heavens you were brought doing so would be very slight, that LUCASTA was a native of Kent or of one of the adjoining shires; but against this supposition Ah LUCASTA, why so bright? Spread with early streaked light! If still vailed from our sight, What is't but eternall night? Ah LUCASTA, why so chaste? With that vigour, ripenes grac't, Not to be by Man imbrac't Makes that Royall coyne imbace't, And this golden Orchard waste! Ah LUCASTA, why so great, That thy crammed coffers sweat? Yet not owner of a seat May shelter you from Natures heat, And your earthly joyes compleat. Ah Lucasta, why so good? Blest with an unstained flood Flowing both through soule and blood; If it be not understood, 'Tis a Diamond in mud. LUCASTA! stay! why dost thou flye? Thou art not bright but to the eye, Nor chaste but in the mariage-tye, Nor great but in this treasurie, Nor good but in that sanctitie. Harder then the Orient stone, Like an apparition, Or as a pale shadow gone, Then receive this equall dombe: Virgins, strow no teare or bloome, No one dig the Parian wombe; Raise her marble heart i'th' roome, And 'tis both her coarse and tombe. See! what an undisturbed teare She weepes for her last sleepe; But, viewing her, straight wak'd a Star, She weepes that she did weepe. Griefe ne're before did tyranize On th' honour of that brow, And at the wheeles of her brave eyes Was captive led til now. Thus, for a saints apostacy The unimagin'd woes And sorrowes of the Hierarchy None but an angel knowes. Thus, for lost soules recovery The clapping of all wings And triumphs of this victory None but an angel sings. So none but she knows to bemone This equal virgins fate, None but LUCASTA can her crowne Of glory celebrate. Then dart on me CHAST LIGHT one ray, By which I may discry Thy joy cleare through this cloudy day To dresse my sorrow by. Oh, stay that covetous hand; first turn all eye, All depth and minde; then mystically spye Her soul's faire picture, her faire soul's, in all So truely copied from th' originall, That you will sweare her body by this law Is but its shadow, as this, its; now draw. Cold as the breath of winds that blow To silver shot descending snow, Lucasta sigh't; when she did close The world in frosty chaines! And then a frowne to rubies frose The blood boyl'd in our veines: Yet cooled not the heat her sphere Of beauties first had kindled there. Then mov'd, and with a suddaine flame Impatient to melt all againe, Straight from her eyes she lightning hurl'd, And earth in ashes mournes; The sun his blaze denies the world, And in her luster burnes: Yet warmed not the hearts, her nice Disdaine had first congeal'd to ice. And now her teares nor griev'd desire Can quench this raging, pleasing fire; Fate but one way allowes; behold Her smiles' divinity! They fann'd this heat, and thaw'd that cold, So fram'd up a new sky. Thus earth, from flames and ice repreev'd, E're since hath in her sun-shine liv'd. That frantick errour I adore, And am confirm'd the earth turns round; Now satisfied o're and o're, As rowling waves, so flowes the ground, And as her neighbour reels the shore: Finde such a woman says she loves; She's that fixt heav'n, which never moves. In marble, steele, or porphyrie, Who carves or stampes his armes or face, Lookes it by rust or storme must dye: This womans love no time can raze, Hardned like ice in the sun's eye, Or your reflection in a glasse, Which keepes possession, though you passe. We not behold a watches hand To stir, nor plants or flowers to grow; Must we infer that this doth stand, And therefore, that those do not blow? This she acts calmer, like Heav'ns brand, The stedfast lightning, slow loves dart, She kils, but ere we feele the smart. Oh, she is constant as the winde, That revels in an ev'nings aire! Certaine as wayes unto the blinde, More reall then her flatt'ries are; Gentle as chaines that honour binde, But as the divel not halfe so true. Though so much wet and drie Doth drowne our eye, Thou keep'st thy winged voice from me? Amyntor, a profounder sea, I feare, Hath swallow'd me, where now My armes do row, I floate i'th' ocean of a teare. Lucasta weepes, lest I look back and tread Your Watry land againe. Amyn. I'd through the raine; Such showrs are quickly over-spread. Conceive how joy, after this short divorce, Will circle her with beames, When, like your streames, You shall rowle back with kinder force, And call the helping winds to vent your thought. Alex. Amyntor! Chloris! where Or in what sphere Say, may that glorious fair be sought? Amyn. She's now the center of these armes e're blest, Whence may she never move, Haste to their everlasting rest. Alex. Ah subtile swaine! doth not my flame rise high As yours, and burne as hot? Am not I shot With the selfe same artillery? And can I breath without her air? Amyn. Why, then, From thy tempestuous earth, Where blood and dearth Raigne 'stead of kings, agen Wafte thy selfe over, and lest storms from far Arise, bring in our sight The seas delight, Lucasta, that bright northerne star. Alex. But as we cut the rugged deepe, I feare The green god stops his fell Chariot of shell, And smooths the maine to ravish her. Amyn. Oh no, the prince of waters' fires are done; He as his empire's old, And rivers, cold; His queen now runs abed to th' sun; But all his treasure he shall ope' that day: Tritons shall sound: his fleete In silver meete, And to her their rich offrings pay. Alex. We flye, Amyntor, not amaz'd how sent By water, earth, or aire: Or if with her By fire: ev'n there I move in mine owne element. From the dire monument of thy black roome, Wher now that vestal flame thou dost intombe, As in the inmost cell of all earths wombe. Sacred Lucasta, like the pow'rfull ray Of heavenly truth, passe this Cimmerian way, Whilst all the standards of your beames display. Arise and climbe our whitest, highest hill; There your sad thoughts with joy and wonder fill, And see seas calme as earth, earth as your will. Behold! how lightning like a taper flyes, And guilds your chari't, but ashamed dyes, Seeing it selfe out-gloried by your eyes. Threatning and boystrous tempests gently bow, And to your steps part in soft paths, when now There no where hangs a cloud, but on your brow. No showrs but 'twixt your lids, nor gelid snow, But what your whiter, chaster brest doth ow, Whilst winds in chains colder for sorrow blow. Shrill trumpets doe only sound to eate, Artillery hath loaden ev'ry dish with meate, And drums at ev'ry health alarmes beate. All things Lucasta, but Lucasta, call, Trees borrow tongues, waters in accents fall, The aire doth sing, and fire is musicall. Awake from the dead vault in which you dwell, All's loyall here, except your thoughts rebell Which, so let loose, often their gen'rall quell. See! she obeys! By all obeyed thus, No storms, heats, colds, no soules contentious, Nor civill war is found; I meane, to us. Lovers and angels, though in heav'n they show, And see the woes and discords here below, What they not feele, must not be said to know. Up with the jolly bird of light Who sounds his third retreat to night; Faire Amarantha from her bed Ashamed starts, and rises red As the carnation-mantled morne, Who now the blushing robe doth spurne, And puts on angry gray, whilst she, The envy of a deity, Arayes her limbes, too rich indeed To be inshrin'd in such a weed; Yet lovely 'twas and strait, but fit; Not made for her, but she to it: By nature it sate close and free, As the just bark unto the tree: Unlike Love's martyrs of the towne, All day imprison'd in a gown, Who, rackt in silke 'stead of a dresse, Are cloathed in a frame or presse, And with that liberty and room, The dead expatiate in a tombe. No cabinets with curious washes, Bladders and perfumed plashes; No venome-temper'd water's here, Mercury is banished this sphere: Her payle's all this, in which wet glasse She both doth cleanse and view her face. Far hence, all Iberian smells, Hot amulets, Pomander spells, Fragrant gales, cool ay'r, the fresh And naturall odour of her flesh, Proclaim her sweet from th' wombe as morne. Those colour'd things were made, not borne. Which, fixt within their narrow straits, Do looke like their own counterfeyts. So like the Provance rose she walkt, Flowerd with blush, with verdure stalkt; Th' officious wind her loose hayre curles, The dewe her happy linnen purles, But wets a tresse, which instantly Sol with a crisping beame doth dry. Into the garden is she come, Love and delight's Elisium; If ever earth show'd all her store, View her discolourd budding floore; Here her glad eye she largely feedes, And stands 'mongst them, as they 'mong weeds; The flowers in their best aray As to their queen their tribute pay, And freely to her lap proscribe A daughter out of ev'ry tribe. Thus as she moves, they all bequeath At once the incense of their breath. The noble Heliotropian Now turnes to her, and knowes no sun. And as her glorious face doth vary, So opens loyall golden Mary Who, if but glanced from her sight, Straight shuts again, as it were night. The violet else lost ith' heap Doth spread fresh purple for each step, With whose humility possest, Sh' inthrones the Poore Girle in her breast: The July-flow'r that hereto thriv'd, Knowing her self no longer-liv'd, But for one look of her upheaves, Then 'stead of teares straight sheds her leaves. Now the rich robed Tulip who, Clad all in tissue close, doth woe Her sweet to th' eye but smelling sower , She gathers to adorn her bower. But the proud Hony-suckle spreads Like a pavilion her heads, Contemnes the wanting commonalty, That but to two ends usefull be, And to her lips thus aptly plac't, With smell and hue presents her tast. So all their due obedience pay, Each thronging to be in her way: Faire Amarantha with her eye Thanks those that live, which else would dye: The rest, in silken fetters bound, By crowning her are crown and crown'd. And now the sun doth higher rise, Our Flora to the meadow hies: The poore distressed heifers low, And as sh' approacheth gently bow, Begging her charitable leasure To strip them of their milkie treasure. Out of the yeomanry oth' heard, With grave aspect, and feet prepar'd, A rev'rend lady-cow drawes neare, Bids Amarantha welcome here; And from her privy purse lets fall A pearle or two, which seeme to call This adorn'd adored fayry To the banquet of her dayry. Soft Amarantha weeps to see 'Mongst men such inhumanitie, That those, who do receive in hay, And pay in silver twice a day, Should by their cruell barb'rous theft Be both of that and life bereft. But 'tis decreed, when ere this dies, That she shall fall a sacrifice Unto the gods, since those, that trace Her stemme, show 'tis a god-like race, Descending in an even line From heifers and from steeres divine, Making the honour'd extract full In Io and Europa's bull. She was the largest goodliest beast, That ever mead or altar blest; Round was her udder, and more white Then is the Milkie Way in night; Her full broad eye did sparkle fire; Her breath was sweet as kind desire, And in her beauteous crescent shone, Bright as the argent-horned moone. But see! this whiteness is obscure, Cynthia spotted, she impure; Her body writheld, and her eyes Departing lights at obsequies: Her lowing hot to the fresh gale, Her breath perfumes the field withall; To those two suns that ever shine, To those plump parts she doth inshrine, To th' hovering snow of either hand, That love and cruelty command. After the breakfast on her teat, She takes her leave oth' mournfull neat Who, by her toucht, now prizeth her life, Worthy alone the hollowed knife. Into the neighbring wood she's gone, Whose roofe defies the tell-tale Sunne, And locks out ev'ry prying beame; Close by the lips of a cleare streame, She sits and entertaines her eye With the moist chrystall and the frye With burnisht-silver mal'd, whose oares Amazed still make to the shoares; What need she other bait or charm, What hook or angle, but her arm? The happy captive, gladly ta'n, Sues ever to be slave in vaine, Who instantly confirm'd in's feares Hasts to his element of teares. From hence her various windings roave To a well-orderd stately grove; This is the pallace of the wood And court oth' Royall Oake, where stood The whole nobility: the Pine, Strait Ash, tall Firre, and wanton Vine; The proper Cedar, and the rest. Here she her deeper senses blest; Admires great Nature in this pile, Floor'd with greene-velvet Camomile, Garnisht with gems of unset fruit, Supply'd still with a self recruit; Her bosom wrought with pretty eyes Of never-planted Strawberries; Where th' winged musick of the ayre Do richly feast, and for their fare, Each evening in a silent shade, Bestow a gratefull serenade. Thus ev'n tyerd with delight, Sated in soul and appetite; Full of the purple Plumme and Peare, The golden Apple, with the faire Grape that mirth fain would have taught her, And nuts, which squirrells cracking brought her; She softly layes her weary limbs, Whilst gentle slumber now beginnes To draw the curtaines of her eye; When straight awakend with a crie And bitter groan, again reposes, Again a deep sigh interposes. And now she heares a trembling voyce: Ah! can there ought on earth rejoyce! Why weares she this gay livery, Not black as her dark entrails be? Can trees be green, and to the ay'r Thus prostitute their flowing hayr? Why do they sprout, not witherd dy? Must each thing live, save wretched I? Can dayes triumph in blew and red, When both their light and life is fled? Fly Joy on wings of Popinjayes To courts of fools, where as your playes Dye laught at and forgot; whilst all That's good mourns at this funerall. Weep, all ye Graces, and you sweet Quire, that at the hill inspir'd meet: Love, put thy tapers out, that we And th' world may seem as blind as thee; And be, since she is lost ah wound! Not Heav'n it self by any found. Now as a prisoner new cast, Who sleepes in chaines that night, his last, Next morn is wak't with a repreeve, And from his trance, not dream bid live, Wonders his sence not having scope Who speaks, his friend or his false hope. So Amarantha heard, but feare Dares not yet trust her tempting care; And as againe her arms oth' ground Spread pillows for her head, a sound More dismall makes a swift divorce, And starts her thus: Rage, rapine, force! Ye blew-flam'd daughters oth' abysse, Bring all your snakes, here let them hisse; Let not a leaf its freshnesse keep; Blast all their roots, and as you creepe, And leave behind your deadly slime, Poyson the budding branch in's prime: Wast the proud bowers of this grove, That fiends may dwell in it, and move As in their proper hell, whilst she Above laments this tragedy: Yet pities not our fate; oh faire Vow-breaker, now betroth'd to th' ay'r! Why by those lawes did we not die, As live but one, Lucasta! why As he Lucasta nam'd, a groan Strangles the fainting passing tone; But as she heard, Lucasta smiles, Posses her round; she's slipt mean whiles Behind the blind of a thick bush, When, each word temp'ring with a blush, She gently thus bespake; Sad swaine, If mates in woe do ease our pain, Here's one full of that antick grief, Which stifled would for ever live, But told, expires; pray then, reveale To show our wound is half to heale , What mortall nymph or deity Bewail you thus? Who ere you be, The shepheard sigh't, my woes I crave Smotherd in me, me in my grave; Yet be in show or truth a saint, Or fiend, breath anthemes, heare my plaint, For her and thy breath's symphony, Which now makes full the harmony Above, and to whose voice the spheres Listen, and call her musick theirs; This was I blest on earth with, so As Druids amorous did grow, Jealous of both: for as one day This star, as yet but set in clay, By an imbracing river lay, They steept her in the hollowed brooke, Which from her humane nature tooke, And straight to heaven with winged feare, Thus, ravisht with her, ravish her. The nymph reply'd: This holy rape Became the gods, whose obscure shape They cloth'd with light, whilst ill you grieve Your better life should ever live, And weep that she, to whom you wish What heav'n could give, has all its blisse. Calling her angell here, yet be Sad at this true divinity: She's for the altar, not the skies, Whom first you crowne, then sacrifice. Fond man thus to a precipice Aspires, till at the top his eyes Have lost the safety of the plain, Then begs of Fate the vales againe. The now confounded shepheard cries: Ye all-confounding destines! How did you make that voice so sweet Without that glorious form to it? Thou sacred spirit of my deare, Where e're thou hoverst o're us, hear! Imbark thee in the lawrell tree, And a new Phebus follows thee, Who, 'stead of all his burning rayes, Will strive to catch thee with his layes; Or, if within the Orient Vine, Thou art both deity and wine; But if thou takest the mirtle grove, That Paphos is, thou, Queene of Love, And I, thy swain who else must die, By no beasts, but thy cruelty: But you are rougher than the winde. Are souls on earth then heav'n more kind? Imprisoned in mortality Lucasta would have answered me. Lucasta, Amarantha said, Is she that virgin-star? a maid, Except her prouder livery, In beauty poore, and cheap as I; Whose glory like a meteor shone, Or aery apparition, Admir'd a while, but slighted known. Fierce, as the chafed lyon hies, He rowses him, and to her flies, Thinking to answer with his speare Now, as in warre intestine where, Ith' mist of a black battell, each Layes at his next, then makes a breach Through th' entrayles of another, whom He sees nor knows whence he did come, Guided alone by rage and th' drumme, But stripping and impatient wild, He finds too soon his onely child. So our expiring desp'rate lover Far'd when, amaz'd, he did discover Lucasta in this nymph; his sinne Darts the accursed javelin 'Gainst his own breast, which she puts by With a soft lip and gentle eye, Then closes with him on the ground And now her smiles have heal'd his wound. Alexis too again is found; But not untill those heavy crimes She hath kis'd off a thousand times, Who not contented with this pain, Doth threaten to offend again. And now they gaze, and sigh, and weep, Whilst each cheek doth the other's steep, Whilst tongues, as exorcis'd, are calm; Onely the rhet'rick of the palm Prevailing pleads, untill at last They chain'd in one another fast. Lucasta to him doth relate Her various chance and diffring fate: How chac'd by Hydraphil, and tract The num'rous foe to Philanact, Who whilst they for the same things fight, As Bards decrees and Druids rite, For safeguard of their proper joyes And shepheards freedome, each destroyes The glory of this Sicilie; Since seeking thus the remedie, They fancy building on false ground The means must them and it confound, Yet are resolved to stand or fall, And win a little, or lose all. From this sad storm of fire and blood She fled to this yet living wood; Where she 'mongst savage beasts doth find Her self more safe then humane kind. The lady here strippes her array, And girdles her in home-spunne bayes Then makes her conversant in layes Of birds, and swaines more innocent, That kenne not guile or courtship ment. Now walks she to her bow'r to dine Under a shade of Eglantine, Upon a dish of Natures cheere Which both grew, drest and serv'd up there: That done, she feasts her smell with po'ses Pluckt from the damask cloath of Roses. Which there continually doth stay, And onely frost can take away; Then wagers which hath most content Her eye, eare, hand, her gust or sent. Intranc't Alexis sees and heares, As walking above all the spheres: Knows and adores this, and is wilde, Untill with her he live thus milde. So that, which to his thoughts he meant For losse of her a punishment, His armes hung up and his sword broke, His ensignes folded, he betook Himself unto the humble crook. And for a full reward of all, She now doth him her shepheard call, And in a see of flow'rs install: Then gives her faith immediately, Which he returns religiously; Both vowing in her peacefull cave To make their bridall-bed and grave. But the true joy this pair conceiv'd, Each from the other first bereav'd, And then found, after such alarmes, Fast-pinion'd in each other's armes, Ye panting virgins, that do meet Your loves within their winding sheet, Breathing and constant still ev'n there; Or souls their bodies in yon' sphere, Or angels, men return'd from hell And separated mindes can tell. Like to a WRITHEL'D Carion I have seen Instead of fifty, write her down fifteen Wearing her bought complexion in a box, And ev'ry morn her closet-face unlocks. If in me anger, or disdaine In you, or both, made me refraine From th' noble intercourse of verse, That only vertuous thoughts rehearse; Then, chaste Ellinda, might you feare The sacred vowes that I did sweare. But if alone some pious thought Me to an inward sadnesse brought, Thinking to breath your soule too welle, My tongue was charmed with that spell; And left it since there was no roome So then this silence doth reveal No thought of negligence, but zeal: For, as in adoration, This is love's true devotion; Children and fools the words repeat, But anch'rites pray in tears and sweat. Thou snowy farme with thy five tenements! Tell thy white mistris here was one, That call'd to pay his dayly rents; But she a-gathering flowr's and hearts is gone, And thou left voyd to rude possession. But grieve not, pretty Ermin cabinet, Thy alabaster lady will come home; If not, what tenant can there fit The slender turnings of thy narrow roome, But must ejected be by his owne dombe? Then give me leave to leave my rent with thee: Five kisses, one unto a place: For though the lute's too high for me, Yet servants, knowing minikin nor base, Are still allow'd to fiddle with the case. only brought into play by accomplished musicians. In the address Fair Wench! I cannot court thy sprightly eyes With a base-viol plac'd betwixt my thighs, I cannot lisp, nor to a fiddle sing, Nor run upon a high-strecht minikin. Ay, and to all that forswear marriage, and can be content with other men's wives. Of which consort you two are grounds; one touches the bass, and the other tickles the minikin. For cherries plenty, and for corans Enough for fifty, were there more on's; That well did wash downe pasties-Mary; For peason, chickens, sawces high, With certaine promise to your brother Of the virginity of another, Where it is thought I too may peepe in With knuckles far as any deepe in; For glasses, heads, hands, bellies full Of wine, and loyne right-worshipfull; Whether all of, or more behind a Thankes freest, freshest, faire Ellinda. Thankes for my visit not disdaining, Or at the least thankes for your feigning; For if your mercy doore were lockt-well, I should be justly soundly knockt-well; Cause that in dogrell I did mutter Not one rhime to you from dam-Rotter. Next beg I to present my duty To pregnant sister in prime beauty, Whom well I deeme e're few months elder Will take out Hans from pretty Kelder, And to the sweetly fayre Mabella, A match that vies with Arabella; In each respect but the misfortune, Fortune, Fate, I thee importune. Nor must I passe the lovely Alice, Whose health I'd quaffe in golden chalice; But since that Fate hath made me neuter, I only can in beaker pewter: But who'd forget, or yet left un-sung The doughty acts of George the yong-son? Who yesterday to save his sister Had slaine the snake, had he not mist her: But I shall leave him, 'till a nag on He gets to prosecute the dragon; And then with helpe of sun and taper, Fill with his deeds twelve reames of paper, With his fleet neigher shall keep no-pace. How I grieve that I am well! All my health was in my sicknes, Go then, Destiny, and tell, Very death is in this quicknes. Such a fate rules over me, That I glory when I languish, And do blesse the remedy, That doth feed, not quench my anguish. 'Twas a gentle warmth that ceas'd In the vizard of a feavor; But I feare now I am eas'd All the flames, since I must leave her. Joyes, though witherd, circled me, When unto her voice inured Like those who, by harmony, Only can be throughly cured. Sweet, sure, was that malady, Whilst the pleasant angel hover'd, Which ceasing they are all, as I, Angry that they are recover'd. And as men in hospitals, That are maim'd, are lodg'd and dined; But when once their danger fals, Ah th' are healed to be pined! Fainting so, I might before Sometime have the leave to hand her, But lusty, am beat out of dore, And for Love compell'd to wander. Chloe, behold! againe I bowe: Againe possest, againe I woe; From my heat hath taken fire Gazing with one of mine eyes, Damas, halfe of me expires: Chloe, behold! Our fate's the same. Or make me cinders too, or quench his flame I'd not be King, unlesse there sate Lesse lords that shar'd with me in state Who, by their cheaper coronets, know, What glories from my diadem flow: Its use and rate values the gem: Pearles in their shells have no esteem; And, I being sun within thy sphere, 'Tis my chiefe beauty thinner lights shine there. The Us'rer heaps unto his store By seeing others praise it more; Who not for gaine or want doth covet, But, 'cause another loves, doth love it: Thus gluttons cloy'd afresh invite Their gusts from some new appetite; And after cloth remov'd, and meate, Fall too againe by seeing others eate. My lady-mistresse cast an amourous eye Upon my forme, which her affections drew, Shee was Love's martyr, and in flames did frye. See! with what constant motion Even and glorious, as the sunne, Gratiana steeres that noble frame, Soft as her breast, sweet as her voyce, That gave each winding law and poyze, And swifter then the wings of Fame. She beat the happy pavement By such a starre-made firmament, Which now no more the roofe envies; But swells up high with Atlas ev'n, Bearing the brighter, nobler Heav'n, And in her, all the Dieties. Each step trod out a lovers thought And the ambitious hopes he brought, Chain'd to her brave feet with such arts, Such sweet command and gentle awe, As when she ceas'd, we sighing saw The floore lay pav'd with broken hearts. So did she move: so did she sing: Like the harmonious spheres that bring Unto their rounds their musick's ayd; Which she performed such a way, As all th' inamour'd world will say: The Graces daunced, and Apollo play'd. It was Amyntor's Grove, that Chloris For ever ecchoes, and her glories; Chloris, the gentlest sheapherdesse, That ever lawnes and lambes did blesse; Her breath, like to the whispering winde, Was calme as thought, sweet as her minde; Her lips like coral gates kept in The perfume and the pearle within; Her eyes a double-flaming torch That alwayes shine, and never scorch; Her selfe the Heav'n in which did meet The all of bright, of faire and sweet. Here was I brought with that delight That seperated soules take flight; And when my reason call'd my sence Back somewhat from this excellence, That I could see, I did begin T' observe the curious ordering Of every roome, where 'ts hard to know, Which most excels in sent or show. Arabian gummes do breathe here forth, And th' East's come over to the North; The windes have brought their hyre of sweet To see Amyntor Chloris greet; Balme and nard, and each perfume, To blesse this payre, chafe and consume; And th' Phoenix, see! already fries! Her neast a fire in Chloris eyes! Next the great and powerful hand Beckens my thoughts unto a stand Whose art even Nature hath out-done; For if weake Nature only can Intend, not perfect, what is man, These certainely we must prefer, Who mended what she wrought, and her; And sure the shadowes of those rare And kind incomparable fayre Are livelier, nobler company, Then if they could or speake, or see: For these I aske without a tush, Can kisse or touch without a blush, And we are taught that substance is, If uninjoy'd, but th' shade of blisse. Now every saint cleerly divine, Is clos'd so in her severall shrine; The gems so rarely, richly set, For them wee love the cabinet; So intricately plac't withall, As if th' imbrordered the wall, So that the pictures seem'd to be But one continued tapistrie. After this travell of mine eyes We sate, and pitied Dieties; Wee bound our loose hayre with the vine, The poppy, and the eglantine; One swell'd an oriental bowle Full, as a grateful, loyal soule To Chloris! Chloris! Heare, oh, heare! 'Tis pledg'd above in ev'ry sphere. Now streight the Indians richest prize Is kindled in glad sacrifice; Cloudes are sent up on wings of thyme, Amber, pomgranates, jessemine, And through our earthen conduicts sore Higher then altars fum'd before. So drencht we our oppressing cares, And choakt the wide jawes of our feares. Whilst ravisht thus we did devise, If this were not a Paradice In all, except these harmlesse sins: Behold! flew in two cherubins, Cleare as the skye from whence they came, And brighter than the sacred flame; The boy adorn'd with modesty, Yet armed so with majesty, That if the Thunderer againe His eagle sends, she stoops in vaine. Besides his innocence he tooke A sword and casket, and did looke Like Love in armes; he wrote but five, Yet spake eighteene; each grace did strive, And twenty Cupids thronged forth, Who first should shew his prettier worth. But oh, the Nymph! Did you ere know Carnation mingled with snow? Or have you seene the lightning shrowd, And straight breake through th' opposing cloud? So ran her blood; such was its hue; So through her vayle her bright haire flew, And yet its glory did appeare But thinne, because her eyes were neere. Blooming boy, and blossoming mayd, May your faire sprigges be neere betray'd To eating worme or fouler storme; No serpent lurke to do them harme; No sharpe frost cut, no North-winde teare, The verdure of that fragrant hayre; But may the sun and gentle weather, When you are both growne ripe together, Load you with fruit, such as your Father From you with all the joyes doth gather: And may you, when one branch is dead, Graft such another in its stead, Lasting thus ever in your prime, 'Till th' sithe is snatcht away from Time. Why shouldst thou sweare I am forsworn, Since thine I vow'd to be? Lady, it is already Morn, And 'twas last night I swore to thee That fond impossibility. Have I not lov'd thee much and long, A tedious twelve moneths space? I should all other beauties wrong, And rob thee of a new imbrace; Should I still dote upon thy face. Not but all joy in thy browne haire In others may be found; But I must search the black and faire, Like skilfulle minerallists that sound For treasure in un-plow'd-up ground. Then if, when I have lov'd my round, Thou prov'st the pleasant she; With spoyles of meaner beauties crown'd, I laden will returne to thee, Ev'n sated with varietie. I saw a little Diety, MINERVA in epitomy, Whom VENUS, at first blush, surpris'd, Tooke for her winged wagge disguis'd. But viewing then, whereas she made Not a distrest, but lively shade Of ECCHO whom he had betrayd, Now wanton, and ith' coole oth' Sunne With her delight a hunting gone, And thousands more, whom he had slaine; To live and love, belov'd againe: Ah! this is true divinity! I will un-God that toye! cri'd she; Then markt she SYRINX running fast To Pan's imbraces, with the haste Shee fled him once, whose reede-pipe rent He finds now a new Instrument. THESEUS return'd invokes the Ayre And windes, then wafts his faire; Whilst ARIADNE ravish't stood Half in his armes, halfe in the flood. Proud ANAXERETE doth fall At IPHIS feete, who smiles at all: And he whilst she his curles doth deck Hangs no where now, but on her neck. Here PHOEBUS with a beame untombes Long-hid LEUCOTHOE, and doomes Her father there; DAPHNE the faire Knowes now no bayes but round her haire; And to APOLLO and his Sons, Who pay him their due Orisons, Bequeaths her lawrell-robe, that flame Contemnes, Thunder and evill Fame. There kneel'd ADONIS fresh as spring, Gay as his youth, now offering Herself those joyes with voice and hand, Which first he could not understand. Transfixed VENUS stood amas'd, Full of the Boy and Love, she gaz'd, And in imbraces seemed more Senceless and colde then he before. Uselesse Childe! In vaine said she You beare that fond artillerie; See heere a pow'r above the slow Weake execution of thy bow. So said, she riv'd the wood in two, Unedged all his arrowes too, And with the string their feathers bound To that part, whence we have our wound. See, see! the darts by which we burn'd Are bright Loysa's pencills turn'd, With which she now enliveth more Beauties, than they destroy'd before. Were it that you so shun me, 'cause you wish Cruels't a fellow in your wretchednesse, Or that you take some small ease in your owne Torments, to heare another sadly groane, I were most happy in my paines, to be So truely blest, to be so curst by thee: But oh! my cries to that doe rather adde, Of which too much already thou hast had, And thou art gladly sad to heare my moane; Yet sadly hearst me with derision. Thou most unjust, that really dust know, And feelst thyselfe the flames I burne in. Oh! How can you beg to be set loose from that Consuming stake you binde another at? Uncharitablest both wayes, to denie That pity me, for which yourself must dye, To love not her loves you, yet know the pain What 'tis to love, and not be lov'd againe. Flye on, flye on, swift Racer, untill she Whom thou of all ador'st shall learne of thee The pace t'outfly thee, and shall teach thee groan, What terrour 'tis t'outgo and be outgon. Nor yet looke back, nor yet must we Run then like spoakes in wheeles eternally, And never overtake? Be dragg'd on still By the weake cordage of your untwin'd will Round without hope of rest? No, I will turne, And with my goodnes boldly meete your scorne; My goodnesse which Heav'n pardon, and that fate But I am chang'd! Bright reason, that did give My soule a noble quicknes, made me live One breath yet longer, and to will, and see Hath reacht me pow'r to scorne as well as thee: That thou, which proudly tramplest on my grave, Thyselfe mightst fall, conquer'd my double slave: That thou mightst, sinking in thy triumphs, moan, And I triumph in my destruction. Hayle, holy cold! chaste temper, hayle! the fire Rav'd o're my purer thoughts I feel t' expire, And I am candied ice. Yee pow'rs! if e're I shall be forc't unto my sepulcher, Or violently hurl'd into my urne, Oh make me choose rather to freeze than burne. Oh thou, that swing'st upon the waving eare Of some well-filled oaten beard, Drunk ev'ry night with a delicious teare Dropt thee from Heav'n, where now th'art reard. The joyes of earth and ayre are thine intire, That with thy feet and wings dost hop and flye; And when thy poppy workes, thou dost retire To thy carv'd acorn-bed to lye. Up with the day, the Sun thou welcomst then, Sportst in the guilt plats of his beames, And all these merry dayes mak'st merry men, Thy selfe, and melancholy streames. But ah, the sickle! golden eares are cropt; CERES and BACCHUS bid good-night; Sharpe frosty fingers all your flowrs have topt, And what sithes spar'd, winds shave off quite. Poore verdant foole! and now green ice, thy joys Large and as lasting as thy peirch of grasse, Bid us lay in 'gainst winter raine, and poize Their flouds with an o'erflowing glasse. Thou best of men and friends? we will create A genuine summer in each others breast; And spite of this cold Time and frosen Fate, Thaw us a warme seate to our rest. Our sacred harthes shall burne eternally As vestal flames; the North-wind, he Shall strike his frost-stretch'd winges, dissolve and flye This Aetna in epitome. Dropping December shall come weeping in, Bewayle th' usurping of his raigne; But when in show'rs of old Greeke we beginne, Shall crie, he hath his crowne againe! Night as cleare Hesper shall our tapers whip From the light casements, where we play, And the darke hagge from her black mantle strip, And sticke there everlasting day. Thus richer then untempted kings are we, That asking nothing, nothing need: Though lord of all what seas imbrace, yet he That wants himselfe, is poore indeed. Oh shrill-voiced insect! that with dew-drops sweet toiling ants perchance delight to hear The summer musique of the gras-hopper. Hither with hallowed steps as is the ground, That must enshrine this saint with lookes profound, And sad aspects as the dark vails you weare, Virgins opprest, draw gently, gently neare; Enter the dismall chancell of this rooome, Where each pale guest stands fixt a living tombe; With trembling hands helpe to remove this earth To its last death and first victorious birth: Let gums and incense fume, who are at strife To enter th' hearse and breath in it new life; Mingle your steppes with flowers as you goe, Which, as they haste to fade, will speake your woe. And when y' have plac't your tapers on her urn, How poor a tribute 'tis to weep and mourn! That flood the channell of your eye-lids fils, When you lose trifles, or what's lesse, your wills. If you'l be worthy of these obsequies, Be blind unto the world, and drop your eyes; Waste and consume, burn downward as this fire That's fed no more: so willingly expire; Passe through the cold and obscure narrow way, Then light your torches at the spring of day, There with her triumph in your victory. Such joy alone and such solemnity Becomes this funerall of virginity. Or, if you faint to be so blest, oh heare! If not to dye, dare but to live like her: Dare to live virgins, till the honour'd age Of thrice fifteen cals matrons on the stage, Whilst not a blemish or least staine is scene On your white roabe 'twixt fifty and fifteene; But as it in your swathing-bands was given, Bring't in your winding sheet unsoyl'd to Heav'n. Daere to do purely, without compact good, Or herald, by no one understood But him, who now in thanks bows either knee For th' early benefit and secresie. Dare to affect a serious holy sorrow, To which delights of pallaces are narrow, And, lasting as their smiles, dig you a roome, Where practise the probation of your tombe With ever-bended knees and piercing pray'r, Smooth the rough passe through craggy earth to ay'r; Flame there as lights that shipwrackt mariners May put in safely, and secure their feares, Who, adding to your joyes, now owe you theirs. Virgins, if thus you dare but courage take To follow her in life, else through this lake Of Nature wade, and breake her earthly bars, Y' are fixt with her upon a throne of stars, Arched with a pure Heav'n chrystaline, Where round you love and joy for ever shine. More senseles then her very monument, Which at your weaknes weeps. Spare that vaine teare, Enough to burst the rev'rend sepulcher. Rise and walk home; there groaning prostrate fall, And celebrate your owne sad funerall: For howsoe're you move, may heare, or see, Sing out, pent soules, sing cheerefully! Care shackles you in liberty: Mirth frees you in captivity. Would you double fetters adde? Else why so sadde? Besides your pinion'd armes youl finde Griefe too can manakell the minde. Live then, pris'ners, uncontrol'd; Drink oth' strong, the rich, the old, Till wine too hath your wits in hold; Then if still your jollitie And throats are free Tryumph in your bonds and paines, And daunce to the music of your chaines. You that shall live awhile, before Old time tyrs, and is no more: When that this ambitious stone Stoopes low as what it tramples on: Know that in that age, when sinne Gave the world law, and governd Queene, A virgin liv'd, that still put on White thoughts, though out of fashion: That trac't the stars, 'spite of report, And durst be good, though chidden for't: Of such a soule that infant Heav'n Repented what it thus had giv'n: For finding equall happy man, Th' impatient pow'rs snatch it agen. Thus, chaste as th' ayre whither shee's fled, She, making her celestiall bed In her warme alablaster, lay As cold is in this house of clay: Nor were the rooms unfit to feast Or circumscribe this angel-guest; The radiant gemme was brightly set In as divine a carkanet; Of which the clearer was not knowne, Her minde or her complexion. Such an everlasting grace, Such a beatifick face, Incloysters here this narrow floore, That possest all hearts before. Blest and bewayl'd in death and birth! The smiles and teares of heav'n and earth! Virgins at each step are afeard, Filmer is shot by which they steer'd, Their star extinct, their beauty dead, That the yong world to honour led; But see! the rapid spheres stand still, And tune themselves unto her will. Thus, although this marble must, As all things, crumble into dust, And though you finde this faire-built tombe Ashes, as what lyes in its wombe: Yet her saint-like name shall shine A living glory to this shrine, And her eternall fame be read, When all but VERY VERTUE'S DEAD. When 'tis lost, that's writ in marble. Headley SELECT BEAUTIES, ed. , ii. p. has remarked the similarity between these lines and some in Collins' Belov'd till life can charm no more; See! what a clouded majesty, and eyes Whose glory through their mist doth brighter rise! See! what an humble bravery doth shine, And griefe triumphant breaking through each line, How it commands the face! so sweet a scorne Never did HAPPY MISERY adorne! So sacred a contempt, that others show To this, oth' height of all the wheele below, That mightiest monarchs by this shaded booke May coppy out their proudest, richest looke. Whilst the true eaglet this quick luster spies, And by his SUN'S enlightens his owne eyes; He cures his cares, his burthen feeles, then streight Joyes that so lightly he can beare such weight; Whilst either eithers passion doth borrow, And both doe grieve the same victorious sorrow. These, my best LILLY, with so bold a spirit And soft a grace, as if thou didst inherit For that time all their greatnesse, and didst draw With those brave eyes your royal sitters saw. Not as of old, when a rough hand did speake A strong aspect, and a faire face, a weake; When only a black beard cried villaine, and By hieroglyphicks we could understand; When chrystall typified in a white spot, And the bright ruby was but one red blot; Thou dost the things Orientally the same Not only paintst its colour, but its flame: Thou sorrow canst designe without a teare, And with the man his very hope or feare; So that th' amazed world shall henceforth finde None but my LILLY ever drew a MINDE. With that delight the Royal captiv's brought Before the throne, to breath his farewell thought, To tel his last tale, and so end with it, Which gladly he esteemes a benefit; Findes something there fate cannot overcome, Cals the chain'd prince, and by his glory led, First reaches him his crowne, and then his head; Who ne're 'til now thinks himself slave and poor; For though nought else, he had himselfe before. He weepes at this faire chance, nor wil allow, But that the diadem doth brand his brow, And under-rates himselfe below mankinde, Who first had lost his body, now his minde, With such a joy came I to heare my dombe, And haste the preparation of my tombe, When, like good angels who have heav'nly charge To steere and guide mans sudden giddy barge, She snatcht me from the rock I was upon, And landed me at life's pavillion: Where I, thus wound out of th' immense abysse, Was straight set on a pinacle of blisse. Let me leape in againe! and by that fall Bring me to my first woe, so cancel all: Ah! 's this a quitting of the debt you owe, To crush her and her goodnesse at one blowe? Defend me from so foule impiety, Would make friends grieve, and furies weep to see. Now, ye sage spirits, which infuse in men That are oblidg'd twice to oblige agen, Informe my tongue in labour what to say, And in what coyne or language to repay. But you are silent as the ev'nings ayre, When windes unto their hollow grots repaire. Oh, then accept the all that left me is, Devout oblations of a sacred wish! When she walks forth, ye perfum'd wings oth' East, Fan her, 'til with the Sun she hastes to th' West, And when her heav'nly course calles up the day, And breakes as bright, descend, some glistering ray, To circle her, and her as glistering haire, That all may say a living saint shines there. Slow Time, with woollen feet make thy soft pace, And leave no tracks ith' snow of her pure face; But when this vertue must needs fall, to rise The brightest constellation in the skies; When we in characters of fire shall reade, How cleere she was alive, how spotless, dead. All you that are a kinne to piety: For onely you can her close mourners be, Draw neer, and make of hallowed teares a dearth: Goodnes and justice both are fled the earth. If this be to be thankful, I'v a heart Broaken with vowes, eaten with grateful smart, And beside this, the vild world nothing hath Worth anything but her provoked wrath; So then, who thinkes to satisfie in time, Must give a satisfaction for that crime: Since she alone knowes the gifts value, she Can onely to her selfe requitall be, And worthyly to th' life paynt her owne story In its true colours and full native glory; Which when perhaps she shal be heard to tell, Buffoones and theeves, ceasing to do ill, Shal blush into a virgin-innocence, And then woo others from the same offence; The robber and the murderer, in 'spite Of his red spots, shal startle into white: All good rewards layd by shal stil increase For love of her, and villany decease; Naught be ignote, not so much out of feare Of being punisht, as offending her. So that, when as my future daring bayes Shall bow it selfe in lawrels to her praise, To crown her conqu'ring goodnes, and proclaime The due renowne and glories of her name: My wit shal be so wretched and so poore That, 'stead of praysing, I shal scandal her, And leave, when with my purest art I'v done, Scarce the designe of what she is begunne: Yet men shal send me home, admir'd, exact; Proud, that I could from her so wel detract. Where, then, thou bold instinct, shal I begin My endlesse taske? To thanke her were a sin Great as not speake, and not to speake, a blame Beyond what's worst, such as doth want a name; So thou my all, poore gratitude, ev'n thou In this wilt an unthankful office do: Or wilt I fling all at her feet I have: My life, my love, my very soule, a slave? Tye my free spirit onely unto her, And yeeld up my affection prisoner? Fond thought, in this thou teachest me to give What first was hers, since by her breath I live; And hast but show'd me, how I may resigne Possession of those thing are none of mine. Flew to thy house, as to the Ark. The willing Oxe of himself came Home to the slaughter with the Lamb. And every beast did thither bring Himself, to be an offering. This Queen of Prey now prey to you , Fast to that pirch of ivory In silver chaines and silken clue, Hath now made full thy victory: The swelling admirall of the dread Cold deepe, burnt in thy flames, oh faire! Wast not enough, but thou must lead Bound, too, the Princesse of the aire? Unarm'd of wings and scaly oare, Unhappy crawler on the land, To what heav'n fly'st? div'st to what shoare, That her brave eyes do not command? Ascend the chariot of the Sun From her bright pow'r to shelter thee: Her captive foole outgases him; Ah, what lost wretches then are we! Now, proud usurpers on the right Of sacred beauty, heare your dombe; Recant your sex, your mastry, might; Lower you cannot be or'ecome: Repent, ye er'e nam'd he or head, For y' are in falcon's monarchy, And in that just dominion bred, In which the nobler is the shee. A gentleman, to give us somewhat new, Hath brought up OXFORD with him to show you; Pray be not frighted Tho the scaene and gown's The Universities, the wit's the town's; The lines each honest Englishman may speake: Yet not mistake his mother-tongue for Greeke, For stil 'twas part of his vow'd liturgie: From learned comedies deliver me! Wishing all those that lov'd 'em here asleepe, You'd smile to see, how he do's vex and shake, Speakes naught; but, if the PROLOGUE do's but take, Or the first act were past the pikes once, then Then hopes and joys, then frowns and fears agen, Then blushes like a virgin, now to be Rob'd of his comicall virginity In presence of you all. In short, you'd say More hopes of mirth are in his looks then play. These feares are for the noble and the wise; But if 'mongst you there are such fowle dead eyes, As can damne unaraign'd, cal law their pow'rs, Judging it sin enough that it is ours, And with the house shift their decreed desires, Castles and pyramids No, he wil on, Proud to be rais'd by such destruction, So far from quarr'lling with himselfe and wit, That he wil thank them for the benefit, Since finding nothing worthy of their hate, They reach him that themselves must envy at: The stubborne author of the trifle crime, That just now cheated you of two hours' time, Presumptuous it lik't him, began to grow Carelesse, whether it pleased you or no. But we who ground th' excellence of a play On what the women at the dores wil say, Who judge it by the benches, and afford To take your money, ere his oath or word His SCHOLLARS school'd, sayd if he had been wise He should have wove in one two COMEDIES; The first for th' gallery, in which the throne To their amazement should descend alone, The rosin-lightning flash, and monster spire Squibs, and words hotter then his fire. Th' other for the gentlemen oth' pit, Like to themselves, all spirit, fancy, wit, In which plots should be subtile as a flame, Disguises would make PROTEUS stil the same: Humours so rarely humour'd and exprest, That ev'n they should thinke 'em so, not drest; Vices acted and applauded too, times Tickled, and th' actors acted, not their crimes, So he might equally applause have gain'd Of th' hardned, sooty, and the snowy hand. Where now one SO SO spatters, t'other: no! Tis his first play; twere solecisme 'tshould goe; The next 't show'd pritily, but searcht within It appeares bare and bald, as is his chin; The towne-wit sentences: A SCHOLARS PLAY! Pish! I know not why, but th'ave not the way. We, whose gaine is all our pleasure, ev'n these Are bound by justice and religion to please; Which he, whose pleasure's all his gaine, goes by As slightly, as they doe his comaedy. Culls out the few, the worthy, at whose feet He sacrifices both himselfe and it, His fancies first fruits: profit he knowes none, Unles that of your approbation, Which if your thoughts at going out will pay, Hee'l not looke farther for a second day. he liked it himself, or presumptuously self-satisfied. the fair spectators in the boxes. Unhappy youth, betrayd by Fate To such a love hath sainted hate, And damned those celestiall bands Are onely knit with equal hands; The love of great ones is a love, Gods are incapable to prove: For where there is a joy uneven, There never, never can be Heav'n: 'Tis such a love as is not sent To fiends as yet for punishment; IXION willingly doth feele The gyre of his eternal wheele, Nor would he now exchange his paine For cloudes and goddesses againe. Wouldst thou with tempests lye? Then bow To th' rougher furrows of her brow, Or make a thunder-bolt thy choyce? Then catch at her more fatal voyce; Or 'gender with the lightning? trye The subtler flashes of her eye: Poore SEMELE wel knew the same, Who both imbrac't her God and flame; And not alone in soule did burne, But in this love did ashes turne. How il doth majesty injoy The bow and gaity oth' boy, As if the purple-roabe should sit, And sentence give ith' chayr of wit. Say, ever-dying wretch, to whom Each answer is a certaine doom, What is it that you would possesse, The Countes, or the naked Besse? Would you her gowne or title do? Her box or gem, the thing or show? If you meane HER, the very HER, Abstracted from her caracter, Unhappy boy! you may as soone With fawning wanton with the Moone, Or with an amorous complaint Get prostitute your very saint; Not that we are not mortal, or Fly VENUS altars, and abhor The selfesame knack, for which you pine; But we defend us! are divine, From a right-honourable wombe. Shal we then mingle with the base, And bring a silver-tinsell race? Whilst th' issue noble wil not passe The gold alloyd almost halfe brasse , And th' blood in each veine doth appeare, Part thick Booreinn, part Lady Cleare; Like to the sordid insects sprung Yet lose we not the hold we have, But faster graspe the trembling slave; Play at baloon with's heart, and winde The strings like scaines, steale into his minde Ten thousand false and feigned joyes Far worse then they; whilst, like whipt boys, After this scourge hee's hush with toys. This heard, Sir, play stil in her eyes, And be a dying, live like flyes Caught by their angle-legs, and whom The torch laughs peece-meale to consume. When love with unconfined wings Hovers within my gates; And my divine ALTHEA brings To whisper at the grates; When I lye tangled in her haire, And fetterd to her eye, The birds, that wanton in the aire, Know no such liberty. When flowing cups run swiftly round With no allaying THAMES, Our carelesse heads with roses bound, Our hearts with loyal flames; When thirsty griefe in wine we steepe, When healths and draughts go free, Fishes, that tipple in the deepe, Know no such libertie. When like committed linnets I With shriller throat shall sing The sweetnes, mercy, majesty, And glories of my King. When I shall voyce aloud, how good He is, how great should be, Inlarged winds, that curle the flood, Know no such liberty. Stone walls doe not a prison make, Nor iron bars a cage; Mindes innocent and quiet take That for an hermitage; If I have freedome in my love, And in my soule am free, Angels alone that sore above Enjoy such liberty. I that er'st while the world's sweet air did draw. Now comes my lover tripping like the roe, And brings my longings tangled in her hair. The lover is of course Bethsabe. But for modesty, I should fall foul in words upon fond man, That can forget his excellence and honour, His serious meditations, being the end Of his creation, to learn well to die; Now the peace is made at the foes rate, Whilst men of armes to kettles their old helmes translate, And drinke in caskes of honourable plate. In ev'ry hand a cup be found, That from all hearts a health may sound To GORING! to GORING! see 't goe round. He whose glories shine so brave and high, That captive they in triumph leade each care and eye, Claiming uncombated the victorie, And from the earth to heav'n rebound, Fixt there eternall as this round: To GORING! to GORING! see him crown'd. To his lovely bride, in love with scars, Whose eyes wound deepe in peace, as doth his sword in wars; They shortly must depose the Queen of Stars: Her cheekes the morning blushes give, And the benighted world repreeve; To LETTICE! to LETTICE! let her live. Give me scorching heat, thy heat, dry Sun, That to this payre I may drinke off an ocean: Yet leave my grateful thirst unquensht, undone; Or a full bowle of heav'nly wine, In which dissolved stars should shine, To the couple! to the couple! th' are divine. A great burgandine for WILL MURRAY'S sake GEORGE SYMONDS, he vows the first course to take: When STRADLING a Graecian dog let fly, Who took the bear by the nose immediately; To see them so forward Hugh Pollard did smile, Who had an old curr of Canary oyl, And held up his head that GEORGE GORING might see, Who then cryed aloud, TO MEE, BOYS, TO MEE! Thou little winged archer, now no more As heretofore, Thou maist pretend within my breast to bide, No more, Since cruell Death of dearest LYNDAMORE Hath me depriv'd, I bid adieu to love, and all the world beside. Lay by thy quiver and unbend thy bow Poore sillie foe, Thou spend'st thy shafts but at my breast in vain, My heart hath with a fatall icie deart Already slain, Thou canst not ever hope to warme her wound, Or wound it o're againe. Thou witty cruell wanton, now againe, Through ev'ry veine, Hurle all your lightning, and strike ev'ry dart, Before I feele this pleasing, pleasing paine. I have no heart, Nor can I live but sweetly murder'd with So deare, so deare a smart. Then flye, And kindle all your torches at her eye, To make me dye Her martyr, and put on my roabe of flame: Advanced on my blazing wings on high, In death became Inthroan'd a starre, and ornament unto Her glorious, glorious name. Heark, faire one, how what e're here is Doth laugh and sing at thy distresse; Not out of hate to thy reliefe, But joy t' enjoy thee, though in griefe. See! that which chaynes you, you chaine here; The prison is thy prisoner; How much thy jaylor's keeper art! He bindes your hands, but you his heart. The gyves to rase so smooth a skin, Are so unto themselves within; But, blest to kisse so fayre an arme, Haste to be happy with that harme; And play about thy wanton wrist, As if in them thou so wert drest; But if too rough, too hard they presse, Oh, they but closely, closely kisse. And as thy bare feet blesse the way, The people doe not mock, but pray, And call thee, as amas'd they run Instead of prostitute, a nun. The merry torch burnes with desire To kindle the eternall fire, And lightly daunces in thine eyes To tunes of epithalamies. The sheet's ty'd ever to thy wast, How thankfull to be so imbrac't! And see! thy very very bonds Are bound to thee, to binde such hands. If teares could wash the ill away, A pearle for each wet bead I'd pay; But as dew'd corne the fuller growes, So water'd eyes but swell our woes. One drop another cals, which still Griefe adding fuell doth distill; Too fruitfull of her selfe is anguish, We need no cherishing to languish. Coward fate degen'rate man Like little children uses, when He whips us first, untill we weepe, Then, 'cause we still a weeping keepe. Then from thy firme selfe never swerve; Teares fat the griefe that they should sterve; Iron decrees of destinie Are ner'e wipe't out with a wet eye. But this way you may gaine the field, Oppose but sorrow, and 'twill yield; One gallant thorough-made resolve Doth starry influence dissolve. This is the prittiest motion: Madam, th' alarums of a drumme That cals your lord, set to your cries, To mine are sacred symphonies. What, though 'tis said I have a voice; I know 'tis but that hollow noise Which as it through my pipe doth speed Bitterns do carol through a reed; In the same key with monkeys jiggs, Or dirges of proscribed piggs, Or the soft Serenades above Was ever such a consort seen! Fourscore and fourteen with forteen? Yet sooner they'l agree, one paire, Then we in our spring-winter aire; They may imbrace, sigh, kiss, the rest: Our breath knows nought but east and west. Thus have I heard to childrens cries The faire nurse still such lullabies, That, well all sayd for what there lay , The pleasure did the sorrow pay. Sure ther's another way to save Your phansie, madam; that's to have 'Tis but a petitioning kinde fate The organs sent to Bilingsgate, Where they to that soft murm'ring quire Shall teach you all you can admire! Or do but heare, how love-bang Kate In pantry darke for freage of mate, With edge of steele the square wood shapes, And DIDO to it chaunts or scrapes. The merry Phaeton oth' carre You'l vow makes a melodious jarre; Sweeter and sweeter whisleth He Such swift notes he and 's wheels do run; For me, I yeeld him Phaebus son. Say, faire Comandres, can it be You should ordaine a mutinie? For where I howle, all accents fall, As kings harangues, to one and all. Ulisses art is now withstood: You ravish both with sweet and good; Saint Syren, sing, for I dare heare, But when I ope', oh, stop your eare. Far lesse be't aemulation To passe me, or in trill or tone, Like the thin throat of Philomel, And the smart lute who should excell, As if her soft cords should begin, And strive for sweetnes with the pin. Yet can I musick too; but such As is beyond all voice or touch; My minde can in faire order chime, Whilst my true heart still beats the time; My soule so full of harmonie, That it with all parts can agree; If you winde up to the highest fret, It shall descend an eight from it, And when you shall vouchsafe to fall, Sixteene above you it shall call, And yet, so dis-assenting one, They both shall meet in unison. Come then, bright cherubin, begin! My loudest musick is within. Take all notes with your skillfull eyes; Hearke, if mine do not sympathise! Sound all my thoughts, and see exprest The tablature of my large brest; Then you'l admit, that I too can Musick above dead sounds of man; Such as alone doth blesse the spheres, Not to be reacht with humane eares. Come, pretty birds, present your lays, And learn to chaunt a goddess praise; Ye wood-nymphs, let your voices be Employ'd to serve her deity: And warble forth, ye virgins nine, Some music to my Valentine. Her bosom is love's paradise, There is no heav'n but in her eyes; She's chaster than the turtle-dove, And fairer than the queen of love: Yet all perfections do combine To beautifie my Valentine. She's Nature's choicest cabinet, Where honour, beauty, worth and wit Are all united in her breast. The graces claim an interest: All virtues that are most divine Shine clearest in my Valentine. Yet may I 'mbrace, sigh, kisse, the rest, &c., thus leaving out a line and a half or upward of the poem, as it is printed in LUCASTA. I subjoin the first stanza of Dido as printed in the MUSICA And lov'd the Troian knight, That wandring many coasts had seene, And many a dreadfull fight. As they a-hunting road, a show'r Drove them in a loving bower, Down to a darksome cave: Where Aenaeas with his charmes Lock't Queene Dido in his armes And had what he would have. Now fie upon that everlasting life! I dye! She hates! Ah me! It makes me mad; As if love fir'd his torch at a moist eye, Or with his joyes e're crown'd the sad. Oh, let me live and shout, when I fall on; Let me ev'n triumph in the first attempt! Loves duellist from conquest 's not exempt, When his fair murdresse shall not gain one groan, And he expire ev'n in ovation. Let me make my approach, when I lye downe With counter-wrought and travers eyes; With peals of confidence batter the towne; Had ever beggar yet the keyes? No, I will vary stormes with sun and winde; Be rough, and offer calme condition; March in and pread, or starve the garrison. Let her make sallies hourely: yet I'le find Though all beat of shee's to be undermin'd. Then may it please your little excellence Of hearts t' ordaine, by sound of lips, That henceforth none in tears dare love comence Her thoughts ith' full, his, in th' eclipse ; On paine of having 's launce broke on her bed, That he be branded all free beauties' slave, And his own hollow eyes be domb'd his grave: Since in your hoast that coward nere was fed, Who to his prostrate ere was prostrated. his military vocabulary. He wishes to express that he had fortified his eyes to resist the glances of his fair opponent. Tell me, ye subtill judges in loves treasury, Inform me, which hath most inricht mine eye, This diamonds greatnes, or its clarity? Ye cloudy spark lights, whose vast multitude Of fires are harder to be found then view'd, Waite on this star in her first magnitude. Calmely or roughly! Ah, she shines too much; That now I lye her influence is such , Chrusht with too strong a hand, or soft a touch. Lovers, beware! a certaine, double harme Waits your proud hopes, her looks al-killing charm Guarded by her as true victorious arme. Thus with her eyes brave Tamyris spake dread, Which when the kings dull breast not entered, Finding she could not looke, she strook him dead. I cannot tell, who loves the skeleton Of a poor marmoset; nought but boan, boan; Give me a nakednesse, with her cloath's on. Such, whose white-sattin upper coat of skin, Cut upon velvet rich incarnadin, Has yet a body and of flesh within. Sure, it is meant good husbandry in men, Who do incorporate with aery leane, T' repair their sides, and get their ribb agen. Hard hap unto that huntsman, that decrees Fat joys for all his swet, when as he sees, After his 'say, nought but his keepers fees. Then, Love, I beg, when next thou tak'st thy bow, Thy angry shafts, and dost heart-chasing go, Passe RASCALL DEARE, strike me the largest doe. the word is peculiarly rare. And where that ye come in playne or in place, I shall you tell whyche ben bestys of enchace. One of them is the bucke: a nother is the doo: The foxe and the marteron: and the wylde roo. And ye shall, my dere chylde, other bestys all, Where so ye theym finde, Rascall ye shall them call. Divine Destroyer, pitty me no more, Give me more love, ah, quickly give me more, Or else more cruelty! For left thus as I am, My heart is ice and flame; And languishing thus, I Can neither live nor dye! Your glories are eclipst, and hidden in the grave Of this indifferency; And, Caelia, you can neither altars have, They are aspects divine, That still or smile, or shine, Or, like th' offended sky, Frowne death immediately. Carew has a similar sentiment: Give me more Love, or more Disdain, Bring equall ease unto my paine; The Temperate affords me none: Either extreme, of Love, or Hate, Is sweeter than a calme estate. And so also Stanley AYRES AND DIALOGUES, set by J. Gamble, So much of absence and delay, That thus afflicts my memorie. Why dost thou kill me every day, Yet will not give me leave to die? Comanding asker, if it be Pity that you faine would have, Then I turne begger unto thee, And aske the thing that thou dost crave. I will suffice thy hungry need, So thou wilt but my fancy feed. In all ill yeares, was ever knowne On so much beauty such a dearth? Which, in that thrice-bequeathed gowne, Lookes like the Sun eclipst with Earth, Like gold in canvas, or with dirt Unsoyled Ermins close begirt. Yet happy he, that can but tast This whiter skin, who thirsty is! Fooles dote on sattin motions lac'd: The gods go naked in their blisse. At th' barrell's head there shines the vine, There only relishes the wine. There quench my heat, and thou shalt sup Worthy the lips that it must touch, Nectar from out the starry cup: I beg thy breath not halfe so much. So both our wants supplied shall be, You'l give for love, I, charity. Cheape then are pearle-imbroderies, That not adorne, but cloud thy wast; Thou shalt be cloath'd above all prise, If thou wilt promise me imbrac't. Wee'l ransack neither chest nor shelfe: Ill cover thee with mine owne selfe. But, cruel, if thou dost deny This necessary almes to me, What soft-soul'd man but with his eye And hand will hence be shut to thee? Since all must judge you more unkinde: I starve your body, you, my minde. as a material for female dress. Their glory springs from sattin, Their vanity from feather. Distressed pilgrim, whose dark clouded eyes Speak thee a martyr to love's cruelties, Whither away? What pitying voice I hear, Calls back my flying steps? Pr'ythee, draw near. I shall but say, kind swain, what doth become Of a lost heart, ere to Elysium It wounded walks? First, it does freely flye Into the pleasures of a lover's eye; But, once condemn'd to scorn, it fetter'd lies, An ever-bowing slave to tyrannies. I pity its sad fate, since its offence Was but for love. Can tears recall it thence? O no, such tears, as do for pity call, She proudly scorns, and glories at their fall. Since neither sighs nor tears, kind shepherd, tell, Will not a kiss prevail? Thou may'st as well Court Eccho with a kiss. Can no art move A sacred violence to make her love? O no! 'tis only Destiny or Fate Fashions our wills either to love or hate. Then, captive heart, since that no humane spell Hath power to graspe thee his, farewell. You, that can haply mixe your joyes with cries, And weave white Ios with black Elegies, Can caroll out a dirge, and in one breath Sing to the tune either of life, or death; You, that can weepe the gladnesse of the spheres, And pen a hymne, in stead of inke, with teares; Here, here your unproportion'd wit let fall, To celebrate this new-borne funerall, And greete that little greatnesse, which from th' wombe Dropt both a load to th' cradle and the tombe. Bright soule! teach us, to warble with what feet Thy swathing linnen and thy winding sheet, Weepe, or shout forth that fonts solemnitie, Which at once christn'd and buried thee, And change our shriller passions with that sound, First told thee into th' ayre, then to the ground. Ah, wert thou borne for this? only to call The King and Queen guests to your buriall! To bid good night, your day not yet begun, And shew a setting, ere a rising sun! Or wouldst thou have thy life a martyrdom? Dye in the act of thy religion, Fit, excellently, innocently good, First sealing it with water, then thy blood? As when on blazing wings a blest man sores, And having past to God through fiery dores, Straight 's roab'd with flames, when the same element, Which was his shame, proves now his ornament; Oh, how he hast'ned death, burn't to be fryed, Kill'd twice with each delay, till deified. So swift hath been thy race, so full of flight, Like him condemn'd, ev'n aged with a night, Cutting all lets with clouds, as if th' hadst been Like angels plum'd, and borne a Cherubin. Or, in your journey towards heav'n, say, Tooke you the world a little in your way? Saw'st and dislik'st its vaine pompe, then didst flye Up for eternall glories to the skye? Like a religious ambitious one, Aspiredst for the everlasting crowne? Ah! holy traytour to your brother prince, Rob'd of his birth-right and preheminence! Could you ascend yon' chaire of state e're him, And snatch from th' heire the starry diadem? Making your honours now as much uneven, As gods on earth are lesse then saints in heav'n. Triumph! sing triumphs, then! Oh, put on all Your richest lookes, drest for this festivall! Thoughts full of ravisht reverence, with eyes So fixt, as when a saint we canonize; Clap wings with Seraphins before the throne At this eternall coronation, And teach your soules new mirth, such as may be Worthy this birth-day to divinity. But ah! these blast your feasts, the jubilies We send you up are sad, as were our cries, And of true joy we can expresse no more Thus crown'd, then when we buried thee before. Princesse in heav'n, forgivenes! whilst we Resigne our office to the HIERARCHY. Birds that long have lived free, Caught and cag'd, but pine and die. Here evidently FREE is intended to rhyme with DIE. Pray, ladies, breath, awhile lay by Caelestial Sydney's ARCADY; Heere's a story that doth claime A little respite from his flame: Then with a quick dissolving looke Unfold the smoothnes of this book, To which no art except your sight Can reach a worthy epithite; 'Tis an abstract of all volumes, A pillaster of all columnes Fancy e're rear'd to wit, to be The smallest gods epitome, And so compactedly expresse All lovers pleasing wretchednes. Gallant Pamela's majesty And her sweet sisters modesty Are fixt in each of you; you are, Distinct, what these together were; Divinest, that are really That are ev'ry one the Nine, And brighter here Astreas shine; View our Lucippe, and remaine In her, these beauties o're againe. Ev'n now lookt somewhat colder on His cooler mistresse, and she too Smil'd not as she us'd to do. See! the individuall payre Are at sad oddes, and parted are; They quarrell, aemulate, and stand At strife, who first shal kisse your hand. A new dispute there lately rose Betwixt the Greekes and Latines, whose Temples should be bound with glory, In best languaging this story; Yee heyres of love, that with one SMILE A ten-yeeres war can reconcile; The jarring languages agree! And here, all armes layd by, they doe In English meet to wayt on you. Fair ones, breathe: a while lay by Blessed Sidney's ARCADY: Here's a story that will make You not repent HIM to forsake; And with your dissolving looke Vntie the contents of this booke; To which nought except your sight Can give a worthie epithite. 'Tis an abstract of all volumes, A pillaster of all columnes Fancie e're rear'd to wit, to be Little LOVE'S epitome, And compactedly expresse All lovers happy wretchednesse. Brave PAMELA'S majestie And her sweet sister's modestie Are fixt in each of you, you are Alone, what these together were Divinest, that are really What Cariclea's feign'd to be; That are every one, the Nine; And on earth Astraeas shine; Be our LEUCIPPE, and remaine In HER, all these o're againe. Wonder! Noble CLITOPHON Me thinkes lookes somewhat colder on His beauteous mistresse, and she too Smiles not as she us'd to doe. See! the individuall payre Are at oddes and parted are; Quarrel, emulate, and stand At strife, who first shall kisse your hand. A new warre e're while arose 'Twixt the GREEKES and LATINES, whose Temples should be bound with glory In best languaging this story: You, that with one lovely smile A ten-yeares warre can reconcile; Peacefull Hellens awfull see The jarring languages agree, And here all armes laid by, they doe Meet in English to court you. The happy OBJECT of her eye Whose amorous tale had so betrai'd Desire in this all-lovely maid; That, whilst her check a blush did warm, I read LOVES story in her form. Hearke, reader! wilt be learn'd ith' warres? A gen'rall in a gowne? Strike a league with arts and scarres, And snatch from each a crowne? Wouldst be a wonder? Such a one, As should win with a looke? A bishop in a garison, And conquer by the booke? Take then this mathematick shield, And henceforth by its rules Be able to dispute ith' field, And combate in the schooles. Whilst peaceful learning once againe And the souldier so concord, As that he fights now with her penne, And she writes with his sword. Harke, reader, would'st be learn'd ith' warres, A CAPTAINE in a gowne? Strike a league with bookes and starres, And weave of both the crowne? Would'st be a wonder? Such a one As would winne with a looke? A schollar in a garrison? And conquer by the booke? Take then this mathematick shield, And henceforth by its rules, Be able to dispute ith' field, And combate in the schooles. Whil'st peacefull learning once agen And th' souldier do concorde, As that he fights now with her penne, And she writes with his sword. How have I bin religious? what strange good Has scap't me, that I never understood? Have I hel-guarded Haeresie o'rthrowne? Heald wounded states? made kings and kingdoms one? That FATE should be so merciful to me, To let me live t' have said I have read thee. Faire star, ascend! the joy! the life! the light Of this tempestuous age, this darke worlds sight! Oh, from thy crowne of glory dart one flame May strike a sacred reverence, whilest thy name Like holy flamens to their god of day We bowing, sing; and whilst we praise, we pray. Bright spirit! whose aeternal motion Of wit, like Time, stil in it selfe did run, Binding all others in it, and did give Commission, how far this or that shal live; Like DESTINY of poems who, as she Signes death to all, her selfe cam never dye. And now thy purple-robed Traegedy, In her imbroider'd buskins, cals mine eye, Where the brave Aetius we see betray'd, T' obey his death, whom thousand lives obey'd; Whilst that the mighty foole his scepter breakes, And through his gen'rals wounds his own doome speakes, Weaving thus richly VALENTINIAN, The costliest monarch with the cheapest man. Souldiers may here to their old glories adde, The LOVER love, and be with reason MAD: Not, as of old, Alcides furious, Who wilder then his bull did teare the house Hurling his language with the canvas stone : Twas thought the monster ror'd the sob'rer tone. But ah! when thou thy sorrow didst inspire With passions, blacke as is her darke attire, Virgins as sufferers have wept to see So white a soule, so red a crueltie; That thou hast griev'd, and with unthought redresse Dri'd their wet eyes who now thy mercy blesse; Joy wip't it off, laughter straight sprung't agen. Now ruddy checked Mirth with rosie wings Fans ev'ry brow with gladnesse, whilst she sings Delight to all, and the whole theatre A festivall in heaven doth appeare: Nothing but pleasure, love; and like the morne Each face a gen'ral smiling doth adorne. Heare ye, foul speakers, that pronounce the aire Of stewes and shores, I will informe you where And how to cloath aright your wanton wit, Without her nasty bawd attending it: View here a loose thought sayd with such a grace, Minerva might have spoke in Venus face; So well disguis'd, that 'twas conceiv'd by none But Cupid had Diana's linnen on; And all his naked parts so vail'd, th' expresse The shape with clowding the uncomlinesse; That if this Reformation, which we Receiv'd, had not been buried with thee, The stage as this worke might have liv'd and lov'd Her lines, the austere Skarlet had approv'd; And th' actors wisely been from that offence As cleare, as they are now from audience. Thus with thy Genius did the scaene expire, Wanting thy active and correcting fire, That now to spread a darknesse over all Nothing remaines but Poesie to fall: And though from these thy Embers we receive Some warmth, so much as may be said, we live; That we dare praise thee blushlesse, in the head Of the best piece Hermes to Love e're read; That we rejoyce and glory in thy wit, And feast each other with remembring it; That we dare speak thy thought, thy acts recite: Yet all men henceforth be afraid to write. LUCASTA fair, but hapless maid! Once flourisht underneath the shade Of your illustrious Mother; now, An orphan grown, she bows to you! To you, her vertues' noble heir; Oh may she find protection there! Nor let her welcome be the less, 'Cause a rough hand makes her address: One to whom foes the Muses are Born and bred up in rugged war: For, conscious how unfit I am, I only have pronounc'd her name To waken pity in your brest, And leave her tears to plead the rest. LUCASTA, frown, and let me die, But smile, and see, I live; The sad indifference of your eye Both kills and doth reprieve. You hide our fate within its screen; We feel our judgment, ere we hear. So in one picture I have seen An angel here, the devil there. Heark, how she laughs aloud, Although the world put on its shrowd: Wept at by the fantastic crowd, Who cry: one drop, let fall From her, might save the universal ball. She laughs again At our ridiculous pain; And at our merry misery She laughs, until she cry. Sages, forbear That ill-contrived tear, Although your fear Doth barricado hope from your soft ear. That which still makes her mirth to flow, Is our sinister-handed woe, Which downwards on its head doth go, And, ere that it is sown, doth grow. This makes her spleen contract, And her just pleasure feast: For the unjustest act Is still the pleasant'st jest. Night! loathed jaylor of the lock'd up sun, And tyrant-turnkey on committed day, Bright eyes lye fettered in thy dungeon, And Heaven it self doth thy dark wards obey. Thou dost arise our living hell; With thee grones, terrors, furies dwell; Until LUCASTA doth awake, And with her beams these heavy chaines off shake. Behold! with opening her almighty lid, Bright eyes break rowling, and with lustre spread, And captive day his chariot mounted is; Night to her proper hell is beat, And screwed to her ebon seat; Till th' Earth with play oppressed lies, And drawes again the curtains of her eyes. But, bondslave, I know neither day nor night; Whether she murth'ring sleep, or saving wake; Now broyl'd ith' zone of her reflected light, Then frose, my isicles, not sinews shake. Smile then, new Nature, your soft blast Doth melt our ice, and fires waste; Whil'st the scorch'd shiv'ring world new born Now feels it all the day one rising morn. Introth, I do my self perswade, That the wilde boy is grown a man, And all his childishnesse off laid, E're since LUCASTA did his fires fan; H' has left his apish jigs, And whipping hearts like gigs: For t' other day I heard him swear, That beauty should be crown'd in honours chair. With what a true and heavenly state He doth his glorious darts dispence, Now cleans'd from falsehood, blood and hate, And newly tipt with innocence! Love Justice is become, And doth the cruel doome; Reversed is the old decree; Behold! he sits inthron'd with majestie. Inthroned in LUCASTA'S eye, He doth our faith and hearts survey; Then measures them by sympathy, And each to th' others breast convey; Whilst to his altars now The frozen vestals bow, And strickt Diana too doth go A-hunting with his fear'd, exchanged bow. Th' imbracing seas and ambient air Now in his holy fires burn; Fish couple, birds and beasts in pair Do their own sacrifices turn. This is a miracle, That might religion swell; But she, that these and their god awes, Her crowned self submits to her own laws. Twas not for some calm blessing to deceive, Thou didst thy polish'd hands in shagg'd furs weave; It were no blessing thus obtain'd; Thou rather would'st a curse have gain'd, Then let thy warm driven snow be ever stain'd. Not that you feared the discolo'ring cold Might alchymize their silver into gold; Nor could your ten white nuns so sin, That you should thus pennance them in, Each in her coarse hair smock of discipline. Nor, Hero-like who, on their crest still wore A lyon, panther, leopard, or a bore, To looke their enemies in their herse, Thou would'st thy hand should deeper pierce, And, in its softness rough, appear more fierce. No, no, LUCASTA, destiny decreed, That beasts to thee a sacrifice should bleed, And strip themselves to make you gay: For ne'r yet herald did display A coat, where SABLES upon ERMIN lay. This for lay-lovers, that must stand at dore, Salute the threshold, and admire no more; But I, in my invention tough, Rate not this outward bliss enough, But still contemplate must the hidden muffe. Dull as I was, to think that a court fly Presum'd so neer her eye; When 'twas th' industrious bee Mistook her glorious face for paradise, To summe up all his chymistry of spice; With a brave pride and honour led, Neer both her suns he makes his bed, And, though a spark, struggles to rise as red. Then aemulates the gay Daughter of day; Acts the romantick phoenix' fate, When now, with all his sweets lay'd out in state, LUCASTA scatters but one heat, And all the aromatick pills do sweat, And gums calcin'd themselves to powder beat, Which a fresh gale of air Conveys into her hair; Then chaft, he's set on fire, And in these holy flames doth glad expire; And that black marble tablet there So neer her either sphere Was plac'd; nor foyl, nor ornament, But the sweet little bee's large monument. LADIES turn conjurers, and can impart The hidden mystery of the black art, Black artificial patches do betray; They more affect the works of night than day. The creature strives the Creator to disgrace, By patching that which is a perfect face: A little stain upon the purest dye Is both offensive to the heart and eye. Defile not then with spots that face of snow, Where the wise God His workmanship doth show, The light of nature and the light of grace Is the complexion for a lady's face. Mrs. Pepys wore patches, and so did my Lady Sandwich and her As I beheld a winter's evening air, Curl'd in her court-false-locks of living hair, Butter'd with jessamine the sun left there. Galliard and clinquant she appear'd to give, A serenade or ball to us that grieve, And teach us A LA MODE more gently live. But as a Moor, who to her cheeks prefers White spots, t' allure her black idolaters, Me thought she look'd all ore-bepatch'd with stars. Like the dark front of some Ethiopian queen, Vailed all ore with gems of red, blew, green, Whose ugly night seem'd masked with days skreen. Whilst the fond people offer'd sacrifice To saphyrs, 'stead of veins and arteries, And bow'd unto the diamonds, not her eyes. Behold LUCASTA'S face, how't glows like noon! A sun intire is her complexion, And form'd of one whole constellation. So gently shining, so serene, so cleer, Her look doth universal Nature cheer; Only a cloud or two hangs here and there. I laugh and sing, but cannot tell Whether the folly on't sounds well; But then I groan, Methinks, in tune; Whilst grief, despair and fear dance to the air Of my despised prayer. A pretty antick love does this, Then strikes a galliard with a kiss; As in the end The chords they rend; So you but with a touch from your fair hand Turn all to saraband. Like to the sent'nel stars, I watch all night; For still the grand round of your light And glorious breast Nor will my rolling eyes ere know a west. Now on my down I'm toss'd as on a wave, And my repose is made my grave; Fluttering I lye, Do beat my self and dye, But for a resurrection from your eye. Ah, my fair murdresse! dost thou cruelly heal With various pains to make me well? Thy cut anatomie, And in each mangled part my heart you'l see. I' th' autumn of a summer's day, When all the winds got leave to play, LUCASTA, that fair ship, is lanch'd, And from its crust this almond blanch'd. Blow then, unruly northwind, blow, 'Till in their holds your eyes you stow; And swell your cheeks, bequeath chill death; See! she hath smil'd thee out of breath. Court, gentle zephyr, court and fan Her softer breast's carnation wan; Your charming rhethorick of down Flyes scatter'd from before her frown. Say, my white water-lilly, say, How is't those warm streams break away, Cut by thy chast cold breast, which dwells Amidst them arm'd in isicles? And the hot floods, more raging grown, In flames of thee then in their own, In their distempers wildly glow, And kisse thy pillar of fix'd snow. No sulphur, through whose each blew vein The thick and lazy currents strein, Can cure the smarting nor the fell Blisters of love, wherewith they swell. These great physicians of the blind, The lame, and fatal blains of Inde In every drop themselves now see Speckled with a new leprosie. As sick drinks are with old wine dash'd, Foul waters too with spirits wash'd, Thou greiv'd, perchance, one tear let'st fall, Which straight did purifie them all. And now is cleans'd enough the flood, Which since runs cleare as doth thy blood; Of the wet pearls uncrown thy hair, And mantle thee with ermin air. Lucasta, hail! fair conqueresse Of fire, air, earth and seas! Thou whom all kneel to, yet even thou Wilt unto love, thy captive, bow. Forbear, thou great good husband, little ant; A little respite from thy flood of sweat! Thou, thine own horse and cart under this plant, Thy spacious tent, fan thy prodigious heat; Down with thy double load of that one grain! It is a granarie for all thy train. Cease, large example of wise thrift, awhile For thy example is become our law , And teach thy frowns a seasonable smile: So Cato sometimes the nak'd Florals saw. And thou, almighty foe, lay by thy sting, Whilst thy unpay'd musicians, crickets, sing. LUCASTA, she that holy makes the day, And 'stills new life in fields of fueillemort, Hath back restor'd their verdure with one ray, And with her eye bid all to play and sport, Ant, to work still! age will thee truant call; And to save now, th'art worse than prodigal. Austere and cynick! not one hour t' allow, To lose with pleasure, what thou gotst with pain; But drive on sacred festivals thy plow, Tearing high-ways with thy ore-charged wain. Not all thy life-time one poor minute live, And thy ore-labour'd bulk with mirth relieve? Look up then, miserable ant, and spie Thy fatal foes, for breaking of their law, Hov'ring above thee: Madam MARGARET PIE: And her fierce servant, meagre Sir JOHN DAW: Thy self and storehouse now they do store up, And thy whole harvest too within their crop. Thus we unt rifty thrive within earth's tomb For some more rav'nous and ambitious jaw: The grain in th' ant's, the ant in the pie's womb, The pie in th' hawk's, the hawk ith' eagle's maw. So scattering to hord 'gainst a long day, Thinking to save all, we cast all away. Strive not, vain lover, to be fine; Thy silk's the silk-worm's, and not thine: You lessen to a fly your mistriss' thought, To think it may be in a cobweb caught. What, though her thin transparent lawn Thy heart in a strong net hath drawn: Not all the arms the god of fire ere made Can the soft bulwarks of nak'd love invade. Be truly fine, then, and yourself dress In her fair soul's immac'late glass. Then by reflection you may have the bliss Perhaps to see what a true fineness is; When all your gawderies will fit Those only that are poor in wit. She that a clinquant outside doth adore, Dotes on a gilded statue and no more. How often have my tears Invaded your soft ears, And dropp'd their silent chimes A thousand thousand times? Whilst echo did your eyes, And sweetly sympathize; But that the wary lid Their sluces did forbid. My arms did plead my wound, Each in the other bound; Volleys of sighs did crowd, And ring my griefs alowd; Grones, like a canon-ball, Batter'd the marble wall, That the kind neighb'ring grove Did mutiny for love. The rheth'rick of my hand Woo'd you to understand; Nay, in our silent walk My very feet would talk; My knees were eloquent, And spake the love I meant; But deaf unto that ayr, They, bent, would fall in prayer. No? Know, then, I would melt On every limb I felt, And on each naked part Spread my expanded heart, That not a vein of thee But should be fill'd with mee. Whilst on thine own down, I Would tumble, pant, and dye. That frown, Aminta, now hath drown'd Thy bright front's pow'r, and crown'd Me that was bound. No, no, deceived cruel, no! Love's fiery darts, Till tipt with kisses, never kindle hearts. Adieu, weak beauteous tyrant, see! Thy angry flames meant me, Retort on thee: For know, it is decreed, proud fair, I ne'r must dye By any scorching, but a melting, eye. still known under the same name. Nay, prethee, dear, draw nigher, Yet closer, nigher yet; Here is a double fire, A dry one and a wet. True lasting heavenly fuel When once we twining marry Mad love with wild canary. Off with that crowned Venice, 'Till all the house doth flame, Wee'l quench it straight in Rhenish, Or what we must not name. Milk lightning still asswageth; So when our fury rageth, As th' only means to cross it, Wee'l drown it in love's posset. Love never was well-willer Unto my nag or mee, Ne'r watter'd us ith' cellar, But the cheap buttery. At th' head of his own barrells, Where broach'd are all his quarrels, Should a true noble master Still make his guest his taster. See, all the world how't staggers, More ugly drunk then we, As if far gone in daggers And blood it seem'd to be. We drink our glass of roses, Which nought but sweets discloses: Then in our loyal chamber Refresh us with love's amber. Now tell me, thou fair cripple, Th' almightinesse of tipple, And th' ods 'twixt thee and thee, What of Elizium's missing, Still drinking and still kissing; Adoring plump October; Now, is there such a trifle As honour, the fools gyant, What is there left to rifle, When wine makes all parts plyant? Let others glory follow, In their false riches wallow, And with their grief be merry: Leave me but love and sherry. Fair Princesse of the spacious air, That hast vouchsaf'd acquaintance here, With us are quarter'd below stairs, That can reach heav'n with nought but pray'rs; Who, when our activ'st wings we try, Advance a foot into the sky. Bright heir t' th' bird imperial, From whose avenging penons fall Thunder and lightning twisted spun! Brave cousin-german to the Sun! That didst forsake thy throne and sphere, To be an humble pris'ner here; And for a pirch of her soft hand, Resign the royal woods' command. How often would'st thou shoot heav'ns ark, Then mount thy self into a lark; And after our short faint eyes call, When now a fly, now nought at all! Then stoop so swift unto our sence, As thou wert sent intelligence! Free beauteous slave, thy happy feet In silver fetters vervails meet, And trample on that noble wrist, The gods have kneel'd in vain t' have kist. But gaze not, bold deceived spye, Too much oth' lustre of her eye; The Sun thou dost out stare, alas! Winks at the glory of her face. Be safe then in thy velvet helm, Her looks are calms that do orewhelm, Then the Arabian bird more blest, Chafe in the spicery of her breast, And loose you in her breath a wind Sow'rs the delicious gales of Inde. But now a quill from thine own wing I pluck, thy lofty fate to sing; Whilst we behold the varions fight With mingled pleasure and affright; The humbler hinds do fall to pray'r, As when an army's seen i' th' air, And the prophetick spannels run, And howle thy epicedium. The heron mounted doth appear On his own Peg'sus a lanceer, And seems, on earth when he doth hut, A proper halberdier on foot; Secure i' th' moore, about to sup, The dogs have beat his quarters up. And now he takes the open air, Drawes up his wings with tactick care; Whilst th' expert falcon swift doth climbe In subtle mazes serpentine; And to advantage closely twin'd She gets the upper sky and wind, Where she dissembles to invade, And lies a pol'tick ambuscade. The hedg'd-in heron, whom the foe Awaits above, and dogs below, In his fortification lies, And makes him ready for surprize; When roused with a shrill alarm, Was shouted from beneath: they arm. The falcon charges at first view With her brigade of talons, through Whose shoots, the wary heron beat With a well counterwheel'd retreat. But the bold gen'ral, never lost, Hath won again her airy post; Who, wild in this affront, now fryes, Then gives a volley of her eyes. The desp'rate heron now contracts In one design all former facts; Noble, he is resolv'd to fall, His and his en'mies funerall, And to be rid of her to dy, A publick martyr of the sky. When now he turns his last to wreak The palizadoes of his beak, The raging foe impatient, Wrack'd with revenge, and fury rent, Swift as the thunderbolt he strikes Too sure upon the stand of pikes; There she his naked breast doth hit, And on the case of rapiers's split. But ev'n in her expiring pangs The heron's pounc'd within her phangs, And so above she stoops to rise, A trophee and a sacrifice; Whilst her own bells in the sad fall Ring out the double funerall. Ah, victory, unhap'ly wonne! Whilst the whole field floats in one tear, And all the air doth mourning wear. Close-hooded all thy kindred come To pay their vows upon thy tombe; Do march to take their last adieu. Thy colours bear as banneret; The GOSHAWK and her TERCEL rows'd With tears attend thee as new bows'd, All these are in their dark array, Led by the various herald-jay. But thy eternal name shall live Whilst quills from ashes fame reprieve, Whilst open stands renown's wide dore, And wings are left on which to soar; Doctor robbin, the prelate pye, And the poetick swan, shall dye, Only to sing thy elegie. In the nativity of time, Chloris! it was not thought a crime In direct Hebrew for to woe. Now wee make love, as all on fire, Ring retrograde our lowd desire, And court in English backward too. Thrice happy was that golden age, When complement was constru'd rage, And fine words in the center hid; When cursed NO stain'd no maid's blisse, And all discourse was summ'd in YES, And nought forbad, but to forbid. Love then unstinted love did sip, And cherries pluck'd fresh from the lip, On cheeks and roses free he fed; Lasses, like Autumne plums, did drop, And lads indifferently did drop A flower and a maiden-head. Then unconfined each did tipple Wine from the bunch, milk from the nipple; Paps tractable as udders were. Then equally the wholsome jellies Were squeez'd from olive-trees and bellies: Nor suits of trespasse did they fear. A fragrant bank of strawberries, Diaper'd with violets' eyes, Was table, table-cloth and fare; No palace to the clouds did swell, Each humble princesse then did dwell In the Piazza of her hair. Both broken faith and th' cause of it, All-damning gold, was damn'd to th' pit; Their troth seal'd with a clasp and kisse, Lasted until that extreem day, In which they smil'd their souls away, And in each other breath'd new blisse. Because no fault, there was no tear; No grone did grate the granting ear, No false foul breath, their del'cat smell. No serpent kiss poyson'd the tast, Each touch was naturally chast, And their mere Sense a Miracle. Naked as their own innocence, And unembroyder'd from offence, They went, above poor riches, gay; On softer than the cignet's down, In beds they tumbled off their own: For each within the other lay. Thus did they live: thus did they love, Repeating only joyes above, And angels were but with cloaths on, Which they would put off cheerfully, To bathe them in the Galaxie, Then gird them with the heavenly zone. Now, Chloris! miserably crave The offer'd blisse you would not have, Which evermore I must deny: Whilst ravish'd with these noble dreams, And crowned with mine own soft beams, Injoying of my self I lye. in his reprint. And why an honour'd ragged shirt, that shows, Like tatter'd ensigns, all its bodie's blows? Should it be swathed in a vest so dire, It were enough to set the child on fire; Dishevell'd queen should strip them of their hair, And in it mantle the new rising heir: Nor do I know ought worth to wrap it in, Except my parchment upper-coat of skin; And then expect no end of its chast tears, That first was rowl'd in down, now furs of bears. But since to ladies 't hath a custome been Linnen to send, that travail and lye in; To the nine sempstresses, my former friends, I su'd; but they had nought but shreds and ends. At last, the jolli'st of the three times three Rent th' apron from her smock, and gave it me; 'Twas soft and gentle, subt'ly spun, no doubt; Pardon my boldnese, madam; HERE'S THE CLOUT. Well, yet before the goest, hold heare Stand to thy tackling stout. The allusion is to the contemplated marriage of WIT to his betrothed, WISDOM. In mine one monument I lye, And in my self am buried; Sure, the quick lightning of her eye Melted my soul ith' scabberd dead; And now like some pale ghost I walk, And with another's spirit talk. Nor can her beams a heat convey, That may my frozen bosome warm, Unless her smiles have pow'r, as they, That a cross charm can countercharm. But this is such a pleasing pain, I'm loth to be alive again. I did believe I was in heav'n, When first the heav'n her self was giv'n, That in my heart her beams did passe As some the sun keep in a glasse, So that her beauties thorow me Did hurt my rival-enemy. But fate, alas! decreed it so, That I was engine to my woe: For, as a corner'd christal spot, My heart diaphanous was not; But solid stuffe, where her eye flings Quick fire upon the catching strings: Yet, as at triumphs in the night, You see the Prince's Arms in light, So, when I once was set on flame, I burnt all ore the letters of her name. You are deceiv'd; I sooner may, dull fair, Seat a dark Moor in Cassiopea's chair, Or on the glow-worm's uselesse light Bestow the watching flames of night, Or give the rose's breath To executed death, Ere the bright hiew Of verse to you; It is just Heaven on beauty stamps a fame, And we, alas! its triumphs but proclaim. What chains but are too light for me, should I Say that Lucasta in strange arms could lie? Or that Castara were impure; Or Saccarisa's faith unsure? That Chloris' love, as hair, Embrac'd each en'mies air; That all their good Ran in their blood? 'Tis the same wrong th' unworthy to inthrone, As from her proper sphere t' have vertue thrown. That strange force on the ignoble hath renown; As AURUM FULMINANS, it blows vice down. 'Twere better heavy one to crawl Forgot, then raised, trod on fall. All your defections now Are not writ on your brow; Odes to faults give A shame must live. When a fat mist we view, we coughing run; But, that once meteor drawn, all cry: undone. How bright the fair Paulina did appear, But who could soberly behold A wicked owl in cloath of gold, Or the ridiculous Ape In sacred Vesta's shape? So doth agree Just praise with thee: For since thy birth gave thee no beauty, know, No poets pencil must or can do so. We put on Berenice's hair, And sit in Cassiopeia's chair. Randolph couples it with Ariadne's Crowne in the following Shine forth a constellation, full and bright, Bless the poor heavens with more majestick light, Who in requitall shall present you there Love drunk, the other day, knockt at my brest, But I, alas! was not within. My man, my ear, told me he came t' attest, That without cause h'd boxed him, And battered the windows of mine eyes, And took my heart for one of's nunneries. I wondred at the outrage safe return'd, And stormed at the base affront; And by a friend of mine, bold faith, that burn'd, I called him to a strict accompt. He said that, by the law, the challeng'd might Take the advantage both of arms and fight. Two darts of equal length and points he sent, And nobly gave the choyce to me, Which I not weigh'd, young and indifferent, Now full of nought but victorie. So we both met in one of's mother's groves, The time, at the first murm'ring of her doves. I stript myself naked all o're, as he: For so I was best arm'd, when bare. His first pass did my liver rase: yet I Made home a falsify too neer: For when my arm to its true distance came, I nothing touch'd but a fantastick flame. This, this is love we daily quarrel so, An idle Don-Quichoterie: We whip our selves with our own twisted wo, And wound the ayre for a fly. The only way t' undo this enemy Is to laugh at the boy, and he will cry. What, so beyond all madnesse is the elf, Now he hath got out of himself! His fatal enemy the Bee, Nor his deceiv'd artillerie, His shackles, nor the roses bough Ne'r half so netled him, as he is now. See! at's own mother he is offering; His finger now fits any ring; Old Cybele he would enjoy, And now the girl, and now the boy. He proffers Jove a back caresse, And all his love in the antipodes. Jealous of his chast Psyche, raging he Quarrels with student Mercurie, And with a proud submissive breath Offers to change his darts with Death. He strikes at the bright eye of day, And Juno tumbles in her milky way. The dear sweet secrets of the gods he tells, And with loath'd hate lov'd heaven he swells; Now, like a fury, he belies Myriads of pure virginities, And swears, with this false frenzy hurl'd, There's not a vertuous she in all the world. Olympus he renownces, then descends, And makes a friendship with the fiends; Bids Charon be no more a slave, He Argos rigg'd with stars shall have, And triple Cerberus from below Must leash'd t' himself with him a hunting go. Now Whitehall's in the grave, And our head is our slave, The bright pearl in his close shell of oyster; Now the miter is lost, The proud Praelates, too, crost, And all Rome's confin'd to a cloister. He, that Tarquin was styl'd, Our white land's exil'd, Yea, undefil'd; Not a court ape's left to confute us; Then let your voyces rise high, As your colours did flye, And flour'shing cry: Long live the brave Oliver-Brutus. Now the sun is unarm'd, And the moon by us charm'd, All the stars dissolv'd to a jelly; Now the thighs of the Crown And the arms are lopp'd down, And the body is all but a belly. The town is our own, We'l rule alone: For the Knights have yielded their spent-gorge; And an order is tane With HONY SOIT profane, Shout forth amain: For our Dragon hath vanquish'd the St. George. Small type of great ones, that do hum Within this whole world's narrow room, That with a busie hollow noise Catch at the people's vainer voice, And with spread sails play with their breath, Whose very hails new christen death. Poor Fly, caught in an airy net, Thy wings have fetter'd now thy feet; Where, like a Lyon in a toyl, Howere thou keep'st a noble coyl, And beat'st thy gen'rous breast, that o're The plains thy fatal buzzes rore, Till thy all-bellyd foe round elf Hath quarter'd thee within himself. Was it not better once to play I' th' light of a majestick ray, Where, though too neer and bold, the fire Might sindge thy upper down attire, And thou i' th' storm to loose an eye. A wing, or a self-trapping thigh: Yet hadst thou fal'n like him, whose coil Made fishes in the sea to broyl, When now th'ast scap'd the noble flame; Trapp'd basely in a slimy frame, And free of air, thou art become Slave to the spawn of mud and lome? Nor is't enough thy self do's dresse To thy swoln lord a num'rous messe, And by degrees thy thin veins bleed, And piecemeal dost his poyson feed; But now devour'd, art like to be A net spun for thy familie, And, straight expanded in the air, Hang'st for thy issue too a snare. Strange witty death and cruel ill That, killing thee, thou thine dost kill! Like pies, in whose entombed ark All fowl crowd downward to a lark, Thou art thine en'mies' sepulcher, And in thee buriest, too, thine heir. Yet Fates a glory have reserv'd For one so highly hath deserv'd. As the rhinoceros doth dy Under his castle-enemy, As through the cranes trunk throat doth speed, The aspe doth on his feeder feed; Fall yet triumphant in thy woe, Bound with the entrails of thy foe. Forbear this liquid fire, Fly, It is more fatal then the dry, That singly, but embracing, wounds; And this at once both burns and drowns. The salamander, that in heat And flames doth cool his monstrous sweat, Whose fan a glowing cake is said, Of this red furnace is afraid. Viewing the ruby-christal shine, Thou tak'st it for heaven-christalline; Anon thou wilt be taught to groan: 'Tis an ascended Acheron. A snow-ball heart in it let fall, And take it out a fire-ball; Ali icy breast in it betray'd Breaks a destructive wild granade. 'Tis this makes Venus altars shine, This kindles frosty Hymen's pine; When the boy grows old in his desires, This flambeau doth new light his fires. Though the cold hermit over wail, Whose sighs do freeze, and tears drop hail, Once having pass'd this, will ne'r Another flaming purging fear. The vestal drinking this doth burn Now more than in her fun'ral urn; Her fires, that with the sun kept race, Are now extinguish'd by her face. The chymist, that himself doth still, Let him but tast this limbecks bill, And prove this sublimated bowl, He'll swear it will calcine a soul. Noble, and brave! now thou dost know The false prepared decks below, Dost thou the fatal liquor sup, One drop, alas! thy barque blowes up. What airy country hast to save, Whose plagues thou'lt bury in thy grave? For even now thou seem'st to us On this gulphs brink a Curtius. And now th' art faln magnanimous Fly In, where thine Ocean doth fry, Like the Sun's son, who blush'd the flood To a complexion of blood. Yet, see! my glad auricular Redeems thee though dissolv'd a star, Flaggy thy wings, and scorch'd thy thighs, Thou ly'st a double sacrifice. And now my warming, cooling breath Shall a new life afford in death; See! in the hospital of my hand Already cur'd, thou fierce do'st stand. Burnt insect! dost thou reaspire The moist-hot-glasse and liquid fire? I see 'tis such a pleasing pain, Thou would'st be scorch'd and drown'd again. Retire into thy grove of eglantine, Where I will all those ravished sweets distill Through Love's alembic, and with chemic skill From the mix'd mass one sovereign balm derive. From the warm limbeck of my eye, In such a method to distil Tears on thy marble nature Shirley's POEMS Works by Dyce, vi. . Nature's Confectioner, the BEE, Whose suckers are moist ALCHYMIE, The still of his refining Mould, Minting the garden into gold. Fisher is here with purple wing, Who brings me to the Spring-head, where Crystall is Lymbeckt all the year. A south wind Shall sooner soften marble, and the rain, That slides down gently from his flaggy wings, O'erflow the Alps. Massinger's CITY MADAM, . Mongst the worlds wonders, there doth yet remain One greater than the rest, that's all those o're again, And her own self beside: A Lady, whose soft breast Is with vast honours soul and virtues life possest. Fair as original light first from the chaos shot, When day in virgin-beams triumph'd, and night was not, And as that breath infus'd in the new-breather good, Chearful, as that aspect at this world's finishing, When cherubims clapp'd wings, and th' sons of Heaven did sing; Chast as th' Arabian bird, who all the ayr denyes, And ev'n in flames expires, when with her selfe she lyes. Oh! she's as kind as drops of new faln April showers, That on each gentle breast spring fresh perfuming flowers; She's constant, gen'rous, fixt; she's calm, she is the all We can of vertue, honour, faith, or glory call, And she is whom I thus transmit to endless fame Mistresse oth' world and me, and LAURA is her name. Sing, Laura, sing, whilst silent are the sphears, And all the eyes of Heaven are turn'd to ears. Unchain its feet, take arms, and follow thee. It is the souls, souls sole offering. Each heart string tremble, and each sinew shake. Whilst with your voyce you rarifie the air, None but an host of angels hover here. The lyon and the panther captive lead. Sing, and in heav'n inthrone deposed love, Whilst angels dance, and fiends in order move. What sacred charm may this then be In harmonie, That thus can make the angels wild, The devils mild, And teach low hell to heav'n to swell, And the high heav'n to stoop to hell? Charon! thou slave! thou fooll! thou cavaleer! A slave! a fool! what traitor's voice I hear? At thy, at thy numbred treachery. Villain, I have a pass which who disdains, I will sequester the Elizian plains. Woes me, ye gentle shades! where shall I dwell? He's come! It is not safe to be in hell. Thus man, his honor lost, falls on these shelves; Furies and fiends are still true to themselves. You must, lost fool, come in. W. Oh, let me in! But now I fear thy boat will sink with my ore-weighty sin. Where, courteous Charon, am I now? CHA. Vile rant! At the gates of thy supreme Judge Rhadamant. Welcome to rape, to theft, to perjurie, To all the ills thou wert, we canot hope to be; Oh, pitty us condemned! Oh, cease to wooe, And softly, softly breath, least you infect us too. Upon a day, when the Dog-star Unto the world proclaim'd a war, And poyson bark'd from black throat, And from his jaws infection shot, Under a deadly hen-bane shade With slime infernal mists are made, Met the two dreaded enemies, Having their weapons in their eyes. First from his den rolls forth that load Of spite and hate, the speckl'd toad, And from his chaps a foam doth spawn, Such as the loathed three heads yawn; Defies his foe with a fell spit, To wade through death to meet with it; Then in his self the lymbeck turns, And his elixir'd poyson urns. Arachne, once the fear oth' maid Coelestial, thus unto her pray'd: Heaven's blew-ey'd daughter, thine own mother! The Python-killing Sun's thy brother. Oh! thou, from gods that didst descend, With a poor virgin to contend, Shall seed of earth and hell ere be A rival in thy victorie? Pallas assents: for now long time And pity had clean rins'd her crime; When straight she doth with active fire Her many legged foe inspire. Have you not seen a charact lie A great cathedral in the sea, Under whose Babylonian walls A small thin frigot almshouse stalls? So in his slime the toad doth float And th' spyder by, but seems his boat. And now the naumachie begins; Close to the surface her self spins: Arachne, when her foe lets flye A broad-side of his breath too high, That's over-shot, the wisely-stout, Advised maid doth tack about; And now her pitchy barque doth sweat, Chaf'd in her own black fury wet; Lasie and cold before, she brings New fires to her contracted stings, And with discolour'd spumes doth blast The herbs that to their center hast. Now to the neighb'ring henbane top Arachne hath her self wound up, And thence, from its dilated leaves, By her own cordage downwards weaves, And doth her town of foe attack, And storms the rampiers of his back; Which taken in her colours spread, March to th' citadel of's head. Now as in witty torturing Spain, The brain is vext to vex the brain, Where hereticks bare heads are arm'd In a close helm, and in it charm'd An overgrown and meagre rat, That peece-meal nibbles himself fat; So on the toads blew-checquer'd scull The spider gluttons her self full. And vomiting her Stygian seeds, Her poyson on his poyson feeds. Thus the invenom'd toad, now grown Big with more poyson than his own, Doth gather all his pow'rs, and shakes His stormer in's disgorged lakes; And wounded now, apace crawls on To his next plantane surgeon, With whose rich balm no sooner drest, But purged is his sick swoln breast; And as a glorious combatant, That only rests awhile to pant, Then with repeated strength and scars, That smarting fire him new to wars, Deals blows that thick themselves prevent, As they would gain the time he spent. So the disdaining angry toad, That calls but a thin useless load, His fatal feared self comes back With unknown venome fill'd to crack. Th' amased spider, now untwin'd, Hath crept up, and her self new lin'd With fresh salt foams and mists, that blast The ambient air as they past. And now me thinks a Sphynx's wing I pluck, and do not write, but sting; With their black blood my pale inks blent, Gall's but a faint ingredient. The pol'tick toad doth now withdraw, There wisely doth, intrenched deep, His body in a body keep, And leaves a wide and open pass T' invite the foe up to his jaws, Which there within a foggy blind With fourscore fire-arms were lin'd. The gen'rous active spider doubts More ambuscadoes than redoubts; So within shot she doth pickear, Now gall's the flank, and now the rear; As that the toad in's own dispite Must change the manner of his fight, Who, like a glorious general, With one home-charge lets fly at all. Chaf'd with a fourfold ven'mous foam Of scorn, revenge, his foes and 's own, He seats him in his loathed chair, New-made him by each mornings air, With glowing eyes he doth survey Th' undaunted hoast he calls his prey; Then his dark spume he gred'ly laps, And shows the foe his grave, his chaps. Whilst the quick wary Amazon Of 'vantage takes occasion, And with her troop of leggs carreers In a full speed with all her speers. Down as some mountain on a mouse On her small cot he flings his house; Without the poyson of the elf, The toad had like t' have burst himself: For sage Arachne with good heed Had stopt herself upon full speed, And, 's body now disorder'd, on She falls to execution. The passive toad now only can Contemn and suffer. Here began The wronged maids ingenious rage, Which his heart venome must asswage. One eye she hath spet out, strange smother, When one flame doth put out another, And one eye wittily spar'd, that he Might but behold his miserie. She on each spot a wound doth print, And each speck hath a sting within't; Till he but one new blister is, And swells his own periphrasis. Then fainting, sick, and yellow-pale, She baths him with her sulph'rous stale; Thus slacked is her Stygian fire, And she vouchsafes now to retire. Anon the toad begins to pant, Bethinks him of th' almighty plant, And lest he peece-meal should be sped, Wisely doth finish himself dead. Whilst the gay girl, as was her fate, Doth wanton and luxuriate, And crowns her conqu'ring head all or With fatal leaves of hellebore. Not guessing at the pretious aid Was lent her by the heavenly maid. The neer expiring toad now rowls Himself in lazy bloody scrowls, To th' sov'raign salve of all his ills, That only life and health distills. But loe! a terror above all, That ever yet did him befall! Pallas, still mindful of her foe, Whilst they did with each fires glow Had to the place the spiders lar Dispath'd before the ev'nings star. He learned was in Natures laws, Of all her foliage knew the cause, And 'mongst the rest in his choice want Unplanted had this plantane plant. The all-confounded toad doth see His life fled with his remedie, And in a glorious despair First burst himself, and next the air; Then with a dismal horred yell Beats down his loathsome breath to hell. But what inestimable bliss This to the sated virgin is, Who, as before of her fiend foe, Now full is of her goddess too! She from her fertile womb hath spun Her stateliest pavillion, Whilst all her silken flags display, And her triumphant banners play; Where Pallas she ith' midst doth praise, And counterfeits her brothers rayes, Nor will she her dear lar forget, Victorious by his benefit, Whose roof inchanted she doth free From haunting gnat and goblin bee, Who, trapp'd in her prepared toyle, To their destruction keep a coyle. Then she unlocks the toad's dire head, Within whose cell is treasured That pretious stone, which she doth call A noble recompence for all, And to her lar doth it present, Of his fair aid a monument. Wise emblem of our politick world, Sage Snayl, within thine own self curl'd, Instruct me softly to make hast, Whilst these my feet go slowly fast. Compendious Snayl! thou seem'st to me Large Euclid's strict epitome; And in each diagram dost fling Thee from the point unto the ring. A figure now trianglare, An oval now, and now a square, And then a serpentine, dost crawl, Now a straight line, now crook'd, now all. Preventing rival of the day, Th' art up and openest thy ray; And ere the morn cradles the moon, Th' art broke into a beauteous noon. Then, when the Sun sups in the deep, Thy silver horns e're Cinthia's peep; And thou, from thine own liquid bed, New Phoebus, heav'st thy pleasant head. Who shall a name for thee create, Deep riddle of mysterious state? Bold Nature, that gives common birth To all products of seas and earth, Of thee, as earth-quakes, is afraid, Nor will thy dire deliv'ry aid. Thou, thine own daughter, then, and sire, That son and mother art intire, That big still with thy self dost go, And liv'st an aged embrio; That like the cubbs of India, Thou from thy self a while dost play; But frighted with a dog or gun, In thine own belly thou dost run, And as thy house was thine own womb, So thine own womb concludes thy tomb. But now I must analys'd king Thy oeconomick virtues sing; Thou great stay'd husband still within, Thou thee that's thine dost discipline; And when thou art to progress bent, Thou mov'st thy self and tenement, As warlike Scythians travayl'd, you Remove your men and city too; Then, after a sad dearth and rain, Thou scatterest thy silver train; And when the trees grow nak'd and old, Thou cloathest them with cloth of gold, Which from thy bowels thou dost spin, And draw from the rich mines within. Now hast thou chang'd thee, saint, and made Thy self a fane that's cupula'd; And in thy wreathed cloister thou Walkest thine own gray fryer too; Strickt and lock'd up, th'art hood all ore, And ne'r eliminat'st thy dore. On sallads thou dost feed severe, And 'stead of beads thou drop'st a tear, And when to rest each calls the bell, Thou sleep'st within thy marble cell, Where, in dark contemplation plac'd, The sweets of Nature thou dost tast, Who now with time thy days resolve, And in a jelly thee dissolve, Like a shot star, which doth repair Upward, and rarifie the air. The Centaur, Syren, I foregoe; Those have been sung, and lowdly too: Nor of the mixed Sphynx Ile write, Nor the renown'd Hermaphrodite. Behold! this huddle doth appear Of horses, coach and charioteer, That moveth him by traverse law, And doth himself both drive and draw; Then, when the Sunn the south doth winne, He baits him hot in his own inne. I heard a grave and austere clark Resolv'd him pilot both and barque; That, like the fam'd ship of TREVERE, Did on the shore himself lavere: Yet the authentick do beleeve, Who keep their judgement in their sleeve, That he is his own double man, And sick still carries his sedan: Or that like dames i'th land of Luyck, He wears his everlasting huyck. But banisht, I admire his fate, Since neither ostracisme of state, Nor a perpetual exile, Can force this virtue, change his soyl: For, wheresoever he doth go, He wanders with his country too. Sir, your sad absence I complain, as earth Her long-hid spring, that gave her verdures birth, Who now her cheerful aromatick head Shrinks in her cold and dismal widow'd bed; Whilst the false sun her lover doth him move Below, and to th' antipodes make love. What fate was mine, when in mine obscure cave Shut up almost close prisoner in a grave Your beams could reach me through this vault of night, And canton the dark dungeon with light! Whence me as gen'rous Spahys you unbound, Whilst I now know my self both free and crown'd. But as at Meccha's tombe, the devout blind Pilgrim great husband of his sight and mind Pays to no other object this chast prise, Then with hot earth anoynts out both his eyes: So having seen your dazling glories store, It is enough, and sin for to see more. Or, do you thus those pretious rayes withdraw To whet my dull beams, keep my bold in aw? Or, are you gentle and compassionate, You will not reach me Regulus his fate? Brave prince! who, eagle-ey'd of eagle kind, Wert blindly damn'd to look thine own self blind! But oh, return those fires, too cruel-nice! For whilst you fear me cindars, see, I'm ice! A nummed speaking clod and mine own show, My self congeal'd, a man cut out in snow: Return those living fires. Thou, who that vast Double advantage from one-ey'd Heav'n hast, Look with one sun, though 't but obliquely be, And if not shine, vouchsafe to wink on me. Perceive you not a gentle, gliding heat, And quick'ning warmth, that makes the statua sweat; As rev'rend Ducaleon's black-flung stone, Whose rough outside softens to skin, anon Each crusty vein with wet red is suppli'd, Whilst nought of stone but in its heart doth 'bide. So from the rugged north, where your soft stay Hath stampt them a meridian and kind day; Where now each A LA MODE inhabitant Himself and 's manners both do pay you rent, And 'bout your house your pallace doth resort, And 'spite of fate and war creates a court. So from the taught north, when you shall return, To glad those looks that ever since did mourn, When men uncloathed of themselves you'l see, Then start new made, fit, what they ought to be; Hast! hast! you, that your eyes on rare sights feed: For thus the golden triumph is decreed. The twice-born god, still gay and ever young, With ivie crown'd, first leads the glorious throng: He Ariadne's starry coronet Designs for th' brighter beams of Amoret; Then doth he broach his throne, and singing quaff Unto her health his pipe of god-head off. Him follow the recanting, vexing Nine Who, wise, now sing thy lasting fame in wine; Whilst Phoebus, not from th' east, your feast t' adorn, But from th' inspir'd Canaries, rose this morn. Now you are come, winds in their caverns sit, And nothing breaths, but new-inlarged wit. Hark! One proclaims it piacle to be sad, And th' people call 't religion to be mad. But now, as at a coronation, When noyse, the guard, and trumpets are oreblown, The silent commons mark their princes way, And with still reverence both look and pray; So they amaz'd expecting do adore, And count the rest but pageantry before. Behold! an hoast of virgins, pure as th' air In her first face, ere mists durst vayl her hair: Their snowy vests, white as their whiter skin, Or their far chaster whiter thoughts within: Roses they breath'd and strew'd, as if the fine Heaven did to earth his wreath of swets resign; Next herald Fame a purple clowd her bears , In an imbroider'd coat of eyes and ears, Proclaims the triumph, and these lovers glory, Then in a book of steel records the story. And now a youth of more than god-like form All nak'd, each part betray'd unto the eye, Chastly: for neither sex ow'd he or she. And this was heav'nly love. By his bright hand, A boy of worse than earthly stuff did stand; His bow broke, his fires out, and his wings clipt, And the black slave from all his false flames stript; Whose eyes were new-restor'd but to confesse This day's bright blisse, and his own wretchednesse; Who, swell'd with envy, bursting with disdain, Did cry to cry, and weep them out again. And now what heav'n must I invade, what sphere Rifle of all her stars, t' inthrone her there? No! Phoebus, by thy boys fate we beware Th' unruly flames o'th' firebrand, thy carr; Although, she there once plac'd, thou, Sun, shouldst see Thy day both nobler governed and thee. Drive on, Bootes, thy cold heavy wayn, Then grease thy wheels with amber in the main, And Neptune, thou to thy false Thetis gallop, Appollo's set within thy bed of scallop: Whilst Amoret, on the reconciled winds Mounted, and drawn by six caelestial minds, She armed was with innocence and fire, That did not burn; for it was chast desire; Whilst a new light doth gild the standers by. Behold! it was a day shot from her eye; Chafing perfumes oth' East did throng and sweat, But by her breath they melting back were beat. A crown of yet-nere-lighted stars she wore, In her soft hand a bleeding heart she bore, And round her lay of broken millions more; Then a wing'd crier thrice aloud did call: By her a lady that might be call'd fair, And justly, but that Amoret was there, Was pris'ner led; th' unvalewed robe she wore Made infinite lay lovers to adore, Who vainly tempt her rescue madly bold Chained in sixteen thousand links of gold; Chrysetta thus loaden with treasures slave Did strow the pass with pearls, and her way pave. But loe! the glorious cause of all this high True heav'nly state, brave Philamore, draws nigh, Who, not himself, more seems himself to be, And with a sacred extasie doth see! Fix'd and unmov'd on 's pillars he doth stay, And joy transforms him his own statua; Nor hath he pow'r to breath or strength to greet The gentle offers of his Amoret, Who now amaz'd at 's noble breast doth knock, And with a kiss his gen'rous heart unlock; Whilst she and the whole pomp doth enter there, Whence her nor Time nor Fate shall ever tear. But whether am I hurl'd? ho! back! awake From thy glad trance: to thine old sorrow take! Thus, after view of all the Indies store, The slave returns unto his chain and oar; Thus poets, who all night in blest heav'ns dwell, Are call'd next morn to their true living hell; So I unthrifty, to myself untrue, Rise cloath'd with real wants, 'cause wanting you, And what substantial riches I possesse, I must to these unvalued dreams confesse. But all our clowds shall be oreblown, when thee In our horizon bright once more we see; When thy dear presence shall our souls new-dress, And spring an universal cheerfulnesse; When we shall be orewhelm'd in joy, like they That change their night for a vast half-year's day. Then shall the wretched few, that do repine, See and recant their blasphemies in wine; Then shall they grieve, that thought I've sung too free, High and aloud of thy true worth and thee, And their fowl heresies and lips submit To th' all-forgiving breath of Amoret; And me alone their angers object call, That from my height so miserably did fall; And crie out my invention thin and poor, Who have said nought, since I could say no more. Frank, wil't live unhandsomely? trust not too far Thy self to waving seas: for what thy star, Calculated by sure event, must be, Look in the glassy-epithete, and see. Yet settle here your rest, and take your state, And in calm halcyon's nest ev'n build your fate; Prethee lye down securely, Frank, and keep With as much no noyse the inconstant deep As its inhabitants; nay, stedfast stand, As if discover'd were a New-found-land, Fit for plantation here. Dream, dream still, Lull'd in Dione's cradle; dream, untill Horrour awake your sense, and you now find Your self a bubbled pastime for the wind; And in loose Thetis blankets torn and tost. Frank, to undo thy self why art at cost? Nor be too confident, fix'd on the shore: For even that too borrows from the store Of her rich neighbour, since now wisest know And this to Galileo's judgement ow , The palsie earth it self is every jot As frail, inconstant, waveing, as that blot We lay upon the deep, that sometimes lies Chang'd, you would think, with 's botoms properties; But this eternal, strange Ixion's wheel Of giddy earth ne'er whirling leaves to reel, Till all things are inverted, till they are Turn'd to that antick confus'd state they were. Who loves the golden mean, doth safely want A cobwebb'd cot and wrongs entail'd upon't; He richly needs a pallace for to breed Vipers and moths, that on their feeder feed; The toy that we too true a mistress call, Whose looking-glass and feather weighs up all; And cloaths which larks would play with in the sun, That mock him in the night, when 's course is run. To rear an edifice by art so high, That envy should not reach it with her eye, Nay, with a thought come neer it. Wouldst thou know, How such a structure should be raisd, build low. The blust'ring winds invisible rough stroak More often shakes the stubborn'st, prop'rest oak; And in proud turrets we behold withal, 'Tis the imperial top declines to fall: Nor does Heav'n's lightning strike the humble vales, But high-aspiring mounts batters and scales. A breast of proof defies all shocks of Fate, Fears in the best, hopes in worser state; Heaven forbid that, as of old, time ever Flourish'd in spring so contrary, now never. That mighty breath, which blew foul Winter hither, Can eas'ly puffe it to a fairer weather. Why dost despair then, Frank? Aeolus has A Zephyrus as well as Boreas. 'Tis a false sequel, soloecisme 'gainst those Precepts by fortune giv'n us, to suppose That, 'cause it is now ill, 't will ere be so; Apollo doth not always bend his bow; But oft, uncrowned of his beams divine, With his soft harp awakes the sleeping Nine. In strictest things magnanimous appear, Greater in hope, howere thy fate, then fear: Draw all your sails in quickly, though no storm Threaten your ruine with a sad alarm; For tell me how they differ, tell me, pray, A cloudy tempest and a too fair day? Behold! three sister-wonders, in whom met, Distinct and chast, the splendrous counterfeit Of Juno, Venus and the warlike Maid, Each in their three divinities array'd; The majesty and state of Heav'ns great Queen, And when she treats the gods, her noble meen; The sweet victorious beauties and desires O' th' sea-born princess, empresse too of fires; The sacred arts and glorious lawrels torn From the fair brow o' th' goddesse father-born; All these were quarter'd in each snowy coat, With canton'd honours of their own, to boot. Paris, by fate new-wak'd from his dead cell, Is charg'd to give his doom impossible. He views in each the brav'ry of all Ide; Whilst one, as once three, doth his soul divide. Then sighs so equally they're glorious all: If Pliny, Lord High Treasurer of all Natures exchequer shuffled in this our ball, Peinture her richer rival did admire, And cry'd she wrought with more almighty fire, That judg'd the unnumber'd issue of her scrowl, Infinite and various as her mother soul, That contemplation into matter brought, Body'd Ideas, and could form a thought. Why do I pause to couch the cataract, And the grosse pearls from our dull eyes abstract, That, pow'rful Lilly, now awaken'd we This new creation may behold by thee? To thy victorious pencil all, that eyes And minds call reach, do bow. The deities Bold Poets first but feign'd, you do and make, And from your awe they our devotion take. Your beauteous pallet first defin'd Love's Queen, And made her in her heav'nly colours seen; You strung the bow of the Bandite her son, And tipp'd his arrowes with religion. Neptune as unknown as his fish might dwell, But that you seat him in his throne of shell. The thunderers artillery and brand, You fancied Rome in his fantastick hand; And the pale frights, the pains, and fears of hell First from your sullen melancholy fell. Who cleft th' infernal dog's loath'd head in three, And spun out Hydra's fifty necks? by thee As prepossess'd w' enjoy th' Elizian plain, Which but before was flatter'd in our brain. Who ere yet view'd airs child invisible, A hollow voice, but in thy subtile skill? Faint stamm'ring Eccho you so draw, that we The very repercussion do see. O' th' spring affords us: praesto, and away! You all the year do chain her and her fruits, Roots to their beds, and flowers to their roots. Have not mine eyes feasted i' th' frozen Zone Upon a fresh new-grown collation Of apples, unknown sweets, that seem'd to me Hanging to tempt as on the fatal tree, So delicately limn'd I vow'd to try You, sir, alone, fame, and all-conqu'ring rime, File the set teeth of all-devouring time. When beauty once thy vertuous paint hath on, Age needs not call her to vermilion; Her beams nere shed or change like th' hair of day, She scatters fresh her everlasting ray. Nay, from her ashes her fair virgin fire Ascends, that doth new massacres conspire, Whilst we wipe off the num'rous score of years, And do behold our grandsire as our peers; With the first father of our house compare We do the features of our new-born heir: For though each coppied a son, they all Meet in thy first and true original. Sacred! luxurious! what princesse not But comes to you to have her self begot? As, when first man was kneaded, from his side Is born to's hand a ready-made-up bride. He husband to his issue then doth play, And for more wives remove the obstructed way: So by your art you spring up in two noons What could not else be form'd by fifteen suns; Thy skill doth an'mate the prolifick flood, And thy red oyl assimilates to blood. Where then, when all the world pays its respect, Lies our transalpine barbarous neglect? When the chast hands of pow'rful Titian Had drawn the scourges of our God and man, And now the top of th' altar did ascend To crown the heav'nly piece with a bright end; Whilst he, who in seven languages gave law, And always, like the Sun, his subjects saw, Did, in his robes imperial and gold, The basis of the doubtful ladder hold. O Charls! a nobler monument than that, Which thou thine own executor wert at! When to our huffling Henry there complain'd A grieved earl, that thought his honor stain'd: Away frown'd he , for your own safeties, hast! In one cheap hour ten coronets I'l cast; But Holbeen's noble and prodigious worth Onely the pangs of an whole age brings forth. Henry! a word so princely saving said, It might new raise the ruines thou hast made. O sacred Peincture! that dost fairly draw, What but in mists deep inward Poets saw; 'Twixt thee and an Intelligence no odds, That art of privy council to the gods! By thee unto our eyes they do prefer A stamp of their abstracted character; Thou, that in frames eternity dost bind, And art a written and a body'd mind; To thee is ope the Juncto o' th' abysse, And its conspiracy detected is; Whilest their cabal thou to our sense dost show, And in thy square paint'st what they threat below. Now, my best Lilly, let's walk hand in hand, And smile at this un-understanding land; Let them their own dull counterfeits adore, Their rainbow-cloaths admire, and no more. Within one shade of thine more substance is, Than all their varnish'd idol-mistresses: Whilst great Vasari and Vermander shall Interpret the deep mystery of all, And I unto our modern Picts shall show, What due renown to thy fair art they owe In the delineated lives of those, By whom this everlasting lawrel grows. Then, if they will not gently apprehend, Let one great blot give to their fame an end; Whilst no poetick flower their herse doth dresse, But perish they and their effigies. The day is curl'd about agen To view the splendor she was in; When first with hallow'd hands The holy man knit the mysterious bands When you two your contracted souls did move Like cherubims above, And did make love, As your un-understanding issue now, In a glad sigh, a smile, a tear, a vow. Tell me, O self-reviving Sun, In thy perigrination Hast thou beheld a pair Twist their soft beams like these in their chast air? As from bright numberlesse imbracing rayes Are sprung th' industrious dayes, So when they gaze, And change their fertile eyes with the new morn, A beauteous offspring is shot forth, not born. Be witness then, all-seeing Sun, Old spy, thou that thy race hast run In full five thousand rings; To thee were ever purer offerings Sent on the wings of Faith? and thou, O Night, Curtain of their delight, By these made bright, Have you not mark'd their coelestial play, And no more peek'd the gayeties of day? Come then, pale virgins, roses strow, Mingled with Ios as you go. The snowy ox is kill'd, The fane with pros'lyte lads and lasses fill'd, You too may hope the same seraphic joy, Old time cannot destroy, Nor fulnesse cloy; When, like these, you shall stamp by sympathies Thousands of new-born-loves with your chaste eyes. Twas a blith prince exchang'd five hundred crowns For a fair turnip. Dig, dig on, O clowns But how this comes about, Fates, can you tell, This more then Maid of Meurs, this miracle? Let me not live, if I think not St. Mark Has all the oar, as well as beasts, in's ark! No wonder 'tis he marries the rich sea, But to betroth him to nak'd Poesie, And with a bankrupt muse to merchandise; His treasures beams, sure, have put out his eyes. His conquest at Lepanto I'l let pass, When the sick sea with turbants night-cap'd was; And now at Candie his full courage shown, That wan'd to a wan line the half-half moon. This is a wreath, this is a victorie, Caesar himself would have look'd pale to see, And in the height of all his triumphs feel Himself but chain'd to such a mighty wheel. And now me thinks we ape Augustus state, So ugly we his high worth imitate, Monkey his godlike glories; so that we Keep light and form with such deformitie, As I have seen an arrogant baboon With a small piece of glasse zany the sun. Rome to her bard, who did her battails sing, Indifferent gave to poet and to king; With the same lawrells were his temples fraught, Who best had written, and who best had fought; The self same fame they equally did feel, One's style ador'd as much as t' other's steel. A chain or fasces she could then afford The sons of Phoebus, we, an axe or cord; Sometimes a coronet was her renown, And ours, the dear prerogative of a crown. In marble statu'd walks great Lucan lay, And now we walk, our own pale statua. They the whole year with roses crownd would dine, And we in all December know no wine; Disciplin'd, dieted, sure there hath bin Ods 'twixt a poet and a Capuchin. Of princes, women, wine, to sing I see Is no apocrypha: for to rise high Commend this olio of this lord 'tis fit: Nay, ten to one, but you have part of it; There is that justice left, since you maintain His table, he should counter-feed your brain. Then write how well he in his sack hath droll'd, Straight there's a bottle to your chamber roll'd, Or with embroider'd words praise his French suit, Month hence 'tis yours with his mans, to boot; Or but applaud his boss'd legs: two to none, But he most nobly doth give you one. Or spin an elegie on his false hair: 'Tis well, he cries, but living hair is dear. Yet say that out of order ther's one curl, And all the hopes of your reward you furl. Write a deep epick poem, and you may As soon delight them as the opera, Where they Diogenes thought in his tub, Never so sowre did look so sweet a club. You that do suck for thirst your black quil's blood, And chaw your labour'd papers for your food, I will inform you how and what to praise, Then skin y' in satin as young Lovelace plaies. Beware, as you would your fierce guests, your lice, To strip the cloath of gold from cherish'd vice; Rather stand off with awe and reverend fear, Hang a poetick pendant in her ear, Court her as her adorers do their glasse, Though that as much of a true substance has, Whilst all the gall from your wild ink you drain, The beauteous sweets of vertues cheeks to stain; And in your livery let her be known, As poor and tatter'd as in her own. Nor write, nor speak you more of sacred writ, But what shall force up your arrested wit. Be chast; religion and her priests your scorn, It is a mortal errour, you must know, Of any to speak good, if he be so. Rayl, till your edged breath flea your raw throat, And burn remarks on all of gen'rous note; Each verse be an indictment, be not free Sanctity 't self from thy scurrility. Libel your father, and your dam buffoon, The noblest matrons of the isle lampoon, Whilst Aretine and 's bodies you dispute, And in your sheets your sister prostitute. Yet there belongs a sweetnesse, softnesse too, Which you must pay, but first, pray, know to who. There is a creature, if I may so call That unto which they do all prostrate fall Term'd mistress, when they'r angry; but, pleas'd high, It is a princesse, saint, divinity. To this they sacrifice the whole days light, Then lye with their devotion all night; For this you are to dive to the abysse, And rob for pearl the closet of some fish. Arabia and Sabaea you must strip Of all their sweets, for to supply her lip; And steal new fire from heav'n, for to repair Her unfledg'd scalp with Berenice's hair; Then seat her in Cassiopeia's chair. As now you're in your coach: save you, bright sir, O, spare your thanks is not this finer far Then walk un-hided, when that every stone Has knock'd acquaintance with your ankle-bone? When your wing'd papers, like the last dove, nere Return'd to quit you of your hope or fear, But left you to the mercy of your host And your days fare, a fortified toast. How many battels, sung in epick strain, Would have procur'd your head thatch from the rain Not all the arms of Thebes and Troy would get One knife but to anatomize your meat, A funeral elegie, with a sad boon, Might make you hei! sip wine like maccaroon; But if perchance there did a riband come, Not the train-band so fierce with all its drum: Yet with your torch you homeward would retire, And heart'ly wish your bed your fun'ral pyre. With what a fury have I known you feed Upon a contract and the hopes 't might speed! Not the fair bride, impatient of delay, Doth wish like you the beauties of that day; Hotter than all the roasted cooks you sat To dresse the fricace of your alphabet, Which sometimes would be drawn dough anagrame, Sometimes acrostick parched in the flame; Then posies stew'd with sippets, mottos by: Of minced verse a miserable pye. How many knots slip'd, ere you twist their name With th' old device, as both their heart's the same! Whilst like to drills the feast in your false jaw You would transmit at leisure to your maw; Then after all your fooling, fat, and wine, Glutton'd at last, return at home to pine. Tell me, O Sun, since first your beams did play To night, and did awake the sleeping day; Since first your steeds of light their race did start, Did you ere blush as now? Oh thou, that art The common father to the base pissmire, As well as great Alcides, did the fire From thine owne altar which the gods adore, Kindle the souls of gnats and wasps before? Who would delight in his chast eyes to see Dormise to strike at lights of poesie? Faction and envy now are downright rage. Once a five-knotted whip there was, the stage: The beadle and the executioner, To whip small errors, and the great ones tear; Now, as er'e Nimrod the first king, he writes: That's strongest, th' ablest deepest bites. The muses weeping fly their hill, to see Their noblest sons of peace in mutinie. Could there nought else this civil war compleat, But poets raging with poetic heat, Tearing themselves and th' endlesse wreath, as though Immortal they, their wrath should be so, too? And doubly fir'd Apollo burns to see In silent Helicon a naumachie. Parnassus hears these at his first alarms; Never till now Minerva was in arms. O more then conqu'ror of the world, great Rome! Thy heros did with gentleness or'e come Thy foes themselves, but one another first, Whilst envy stript alone was left, and burst. The learn'd Decemviri, 'tis true, did strive, But to add flames to keep their fame alive; Whilst the eternal lawrel hung ith' air: Nor of these ten sons was there found one heir. Like to the golden tripod, it did pass From this to this, till 't came to him, whose 'twas. Caesar to Gallus trundled it, and he To Maro: Maro, Naso, unto thee? Naso to his Tibullus flung the wreath, He to Catullus thus did bequeath. This glorious circle, to another round, At last the temples of their god it bound. I might believe at least, that each might have A quiet fame contented in his grave, Envy the living, not the dead, doth bite: For after death all men receave their right. If it be sacriledge for to profane Their holy ashes, what is't then their flame? He does that wrong unweeting or in ire, As if one should put out the vestal fire. Let earths four quarters speak, and thou, Sun, bear Now witnesse for thy fellow-traveller. I was ally'd, dear Uncle, unto thee In blood, but thou, alas, not unto me; Your vertues, pow'rs, and mine differ'd at best, As they whose springs you saw, the east and west. Let me awhile be twisted in thy shine, And pay my due devotions at thy shrine. Might learned Waynman rise, who went with thee In thy heav'ns work beside divinity, I should sit still; or mighty Falkland stand To justifie with breath his pow'rful hand; The glory, that doth circle your pale urn, Might hallow'd still and undefiled burn: But I forbear. Flames, that are wildly thrown At sacred heads, curle back upon their own; Sleep, heavenly Sands, whilst what they do or write, Is to give God himself and you your right. There is not in my mind one sullen fate Of old, but is concentred in our state: Vandall ore-runners, Goths in literature: Ploughmen that would Parnassus new-manure; Ringers of verse that all-in-chime, And toll the changes upon every rime. A mercer now by th' yard does measure ore An ode, which was but by the foot before; Deals you an ell of epigram, and swears It is the strongest and the finest wears. No wonder, if a drawer verses rack, If 'tis not his, 't may be the spir't of sack; Whilst the fair bar-maid stroaks the muses teat, For milk to make the posset up compleat. Arise, thou rev'rend shade, great Johnson, rise! Break through thy marble natural disguise! Behold a mist of insects, whose meer breath Will melt thy hallow'd leaden house of death. What was Crispinus, that you should defie The age for him? He durst not look so high As your immortal rod, he still did stand Honour'd, and held his forehead to thy brand. These scorpions, with which we have to do, Are fiends, not only small but deadly too. Well mightst thou rive thy quill up to the back, And scrue thy lyre's grave chords, untill they crack. For though once hell resented musick, these Divels will not, but are in worse disease. How would thy masc'line spirit, father Ben, Sweat to behold basely deposed men, Justled from the prerog'tive of their bed, Whilst wives are per'wig'd with their husbands head? Each snatches the male quill from his faint hand, And must both nobler write and understand, He to her fury the soft plume doth bow: O pen, nere truely justly slit till now! Now as her self a poem she doth dresse. And curls a line, as she would do a tresse; Powders a sonnet as she does her hair, Then prostitutes them both to publick aire. Nor is 't enough, that they their faces blind With a false dye; but they must paint their mind, In meeter scold, and in scann'd order brawl, Yet there's one Sapho left may save them all. But now let me recal my passion. Oh! from a noble father, nobler son You, that alone are the Clarissimi, And the whole gen'rous state of Venice be, It shall not be recorded Sanazar Shall boast inthron'd alone this new made star; You, whose correcting sweetnesse hath forbad Shame to the good, and glory to the bad; Whose honour hath ev'n into vertue tam'd These swarms, that now so angerly I nam'd. Forgive what thus distemper'd I indite: For it is hard a SATYRE not to write. Yet, as a virgin that heats all her blood At the first motion of bad understood, Then, at meer thought of fair chastity, Straight cools again the tempests of her sea: So when to you I my devotions raise, All wrath and storms do end in calm and praise. Wainman not far off, which was very fair. To see them about nothing keep such a wil; APOLLO had spied him, but knowing his mind Past by, and call'd FALKLAND, that sat just behind. He was of late so gone with divinity, That he had almost forgot his poetry, Though to say the truth and APOLLO did know it He might have been both his priest and poet. Cleft as the top of the inspired hill, Struggles the soul of my divided quill, Whilst this foot doth the watry mount aspire, That Sinai's living and enlivening fire, Behold my powers storm'd by a twisted light O' th' Sun and his, first kindled his sight, And my lost thoughts invoke the prince of day, My right to th' spring of it and him do pray. Say, happy youth, crown'd with a heav'nly ray Of the first flame, and interwreathed bay, Inform my soul in labour to begin, Shall I a hecatombe on thy tripod slay, Or my devotions at thy altar pay? While which t' adore th' amaz'd world cannot tell, The sublime Urim or deep oracle. Heark! how the moving chords temper our brain, As when Apollo serenades the main, Old Ocean smooths his sullen furrow'd front, And Nereids do glide soft measures on't; Whilst th' air puts on its sleekest, smoothest face, And each doth turn the others looking-glasse; So by the sinewy lyre now strook we see Into soft calms all storm of poesie, And former thundering and lightning lines, And verse now in its native lustre shines. How wert thou hid within thyself! how shut! Thy pretious Iliads lock'd up in a nut! Not hearing of thee thou dost break out strong, Invading forty thousand men in song; And we, secure in our thin empty heat, Now find ourselves at once surprised and beat, Whilst the most valiant of our wits now sue, Fling down their arms, ask quarter too of you. So cabin'd up in its disguis'd coarse rust, And scurf'd all ore with its unseemly crust, The diamond, from 'midst the humbler stones, Sparkling shoots forth the price of nations. Ye safe unriddlers of the stars, pray tell, By what name shall I stamp my miracle? Thou strange inverted Aeson, that leap'st ore From thy first infancy into fourscore, That to thine own self hast the midwife play'd, And from thy brain spring'st forth the heav'nly maid! Thou staffe of him bore him, that bore our sins, Which, but set down, to bloom and bear begins! Thou rod of Aaron, with one motion hurl'd, Bud'st a perfume of flowers through the world! You strange calcined seeds within a glass, Each species Idaea spring'st as 'twas! Bright vestal flame that, kindled but ev'n now, For ever dost thy sacred fires throw! Thus the repeated acts of Nestor's age, That now had three times ore out-liv'd the stage, And all those beams contracted into one, Alcides in his cradle hath outdone. But all these flour'shing hiews, with which I die Thy virgin paper, now are vain as I: For 'bove the poets Heav'n th' art taught to shine And move, as in thy proper crystalline; Whence that mole-hill Parnassus thou dost view, And us small ants there dabbling in its dew; Whence thy seraphic soul such hymns doth play, As those to which first danced the first day, Where with a thorn from the world-ransoming wreath Thou stung, dost antiphons and anthems breathe; Where with an Angels quil dip'd i' th' Lambs blood, Thou sing'st our Pelicans all-saving flood, And bath'st thy thoughts in ever-living streams, Rench'd from earth's tainted, fat and heavy steams. There move translated youth inroll'd i' th' quire, That only doth with wholy lays inspire; To whom his burning coach Eliah sent, And th' royal prophet-priest his harp hath lent; Which thou dost tune in consort unto those Clap wings for ever at each hallow'd close: Whilst we, now weak and fainting in our praise, Sick echo ore thy Halleluiahs. I'm un-ore-clowded, too! free from the mist! The blind and late Heaven's-eyes great Occulist, Obscured with the false fires of his sceme, Not half those souls are lightned by this theme. Unhappy murmurers, that still repine After th' Eclipse our Sun doth brighter shine , Recant your false grief, and your true joys know; Your blisse is endlesse, as you fear'd your woe! What fort'nate flood is this! what storm of wit! Oh, who would live, and not ore-whelm'd in it? No more a fatal Deluge shall be hurl'd: This inundation hath sav'd the world. Once more the mighty Fletcher doth arise, Roab'd in a vest studded with stars and eyes Of all his former glories; his last worth Imbroiderd with what yet light ere brought forth. See! in this glad farewel he doth appear Stuck with the Constellations of his Sphere, Fearing we numb'd fear'd no flagration, Hath curl'd all his fires in this one ONE: Which as they guard his hallowed chast urn The dull aproaching hereticks do burn. Fletcher at his adieu carouses thus To the luxurious ingenious, As Cleopatra did of old out-vie, Th' un-numb'red dishes of her Anthony, When he at th' empty board a wonderer Smiling she calls for pearl and vinegar, First pledges him in's BREATH, then at one draught Hear, oh ye valiant writers, and subscribe; His force set by y'are conquer'd by this bribe. Though you hold out your selves, he doth commit In this a sacred treason in your wit; Although in poems desperately stout, Give up: this overture must buy you out. Thus with some prodigal us'rer 't doth fare, That keeps his gold still vayl'd, his steel-breast bare; That doth exceed his coffers all but's eye, And his eyes' idol the wing'd Deity: That cannot lock his mines with half the art As some rich beauty doth his wretched heart; Wild at his real poverty, and so wise To win her, turns himself into a prise. First startles her with th' emerald Mad-Lover The ruby Arcas, least she should recover Her dazled thought, a Diamond he throws, Splendid in all the bright Aspatia's woes; Then to sum up the abstract of his store, He flings a rope of Pearl of forty more. Ah, see! the stagg'ring virtue faints! which he Beholding, darts his Wealths Epitome; And now, to consummate her wished fall, Shows this one Carbuncle, that darkens all. What means this stately tablature, The ballance of thy streins, Which seems, in stead of sifting pure, T' extend and rack thy veins? Thy Odes first their own harmony did break: For singing, troth, is but in tune to speak. Nor trus thy golden feet and wings. T' ascend to heav'n by silver strings; This is Urania's heraldry. Thy royal poem now we may extol, As truly Luna blazon'd upon Sol. As when Amphion first did call Each listning stone from's den; But with his words the men; So in your twisted numbers now you thus Not only stocks perswade, but ravish us. Thus do your ayrs eccho ore The notes and anthems of the sphaeres, And their whole consort back restore, As if earth too would blesse Heav'ns ears; But yet the spoaks, by which they scal'd so high, Hol. Old Mantuan! Old Mantuan! who understandeth thee not, Sir, how unravell'd is the golden fleece: Men, that could only fool at FOX AND GEESE, Are new-made polititians by thy book, And both can judge and conquer with a look. The hidden fate of princes you unfold; Court, clergy, commons, by your law control'd. Strange, serious wantoning all that they Bluster'd and clutter'd for, you PLAY. Tis not from cheap thanks thinly to repay Th' immortal grove of thy fair-order'd bay Thou planted'st round my humble fane, that I Stick on thy hearse this sprig of Elegie: Nor that your soul so fast was link'd in me, That now I've both, since't has forsaken thee: That thus I stand a Swisse before thy gate, And dare, for such another, time and fate. Alas! our faiths made different essays, Our Minds and Merits brake two several ways; Justice commands I wake thy learned dust, And truth, in whom all causes center must. Behold! when but a youth, thou fierce didst whip Upright the crooked age, and gilt vice strip; The fasces, yet under the ferula; Rank'd with the sage, ere blossome did thy chin, Sleeked without, and hair all ore within, Who in the school could'st argue as in schools: Thy lessons were ev'n academie rules. So that fair Cam saw thee matriculate, At once a tyro and a graduate. At nineteen, what ESSAYES have we beheld! That well might have the book of Dogmas swell'd; Tough Paradoxes, such as Tully's, thou Didst heat thee with, when snowy was thy brow, When thy undown'd face mov'd the Nine to shake, And of the Muses did a decad make. What shall I say? by what allusion bold? Young reverend shade, ascend awhile! whilst we Now celebrate this posthume victorie, This victory, that doth contract in death Ev'n all the pow'rs and labours of thy breath. Like the Judean Hero, in thy fall Thou pull'st the house of learning on us all. And as that soldier conquest doubted not, Who but one splinter had of Castriot, But would assault ev'n death so strongly charmd, So we, secure in this fair relique, stand The slings and darts shot by each profane hand. These soveraign leaves thou left'st us are become Sear clothes against all Times infection. Sacred Hierocles, whose heav'nly thought First acted ore this comment, ere it wrote, Thou hast so spirited, elixir'd, we Conceive there is a noble alchymie, That's turning of this gold to something more Pretious than gold, we never knew before. Who now shall doubt the metempsychosis Of the great Author, that shall peruse this? Let others dream thy shadow wandering strays In th' Elizian mazes hid with bays; Or that, snatcht up in th' upper region, 'Tis kindled there a constellation; I have inform'd me, and declare with ease In Adriatick waves when Neptune saw, The city stand, and give the seas a law: Now i' th' Tarpeian tow'rs Jove rival me, And Mars his walls impregnable, said he; Let seas to Tyber yield; view both their ods! You'l grant that built by men, but this by gods. ought to read SHALL SEAS, &c. Pastor, arator, eques; pavi, colui, superavi; Capras, rus, hostes; fronde, ligone, manu. A swain, hind, knight: I fed, till'd, did command: Lictorem pro rege necans nunc mutius ultro Sacrifico propriam concremat igne manum: Miratur Porsenna virum, paenamque relaxans Maxima cum obscessis faedera a victor init, Plus flammis patriae confert quam fortibus armis, Una domans bellum funere dextra sua. The hand, by which no king but serjeant dies, Mutius in fire doth freely sacrifice; The prince admires the Hero, quits his pains, And Victor from the seige peace entertains; Rome's more oblig'd to flames than arms or pow'r, When one burnt hand shall the whole war devour. One stabbe could not fierce Cato's life unty; Onely his hand of all that wound did dy. Deeper his fingers tear to make a way Open, through which his mighty soul might stray. Fortune made this delay to let us know, That Cato's hand more then his sword could do. Jussa manus sacri pectus violare Catonis Haesit, et inceptum victa reliquit opus. Ille ait, infesto contra sua vulnera vultu: Estne aliquid, magnus quod Cato non potuit? The hand of sacred Cato, bad to tear His breast, did start, and the made wound forbear; Then to the gash he said with angry brow: And is there ought great Cato cannot do? What doubt'st thou, hand? sad Cato 'tis to kill; But he'l be free: sure, hand, thou doubt'st not still! Cato alive, 'tis just all men be free: Nor conquers he himself, now if he die. Non est, fulleris, haec beata non est It is not, y' are deceav'd, it is not blisse What you conceave a happy living is: To have your hands with rubies bright to glow, Then on your tortoise-bed your body throw, And sink your self in down, to drink in gold, And have your looser self in purple roll'd; With royal fare to make the tables groan, Or else with what from Lybick fields is mown, Nor in one vault hoard all your magazine, But at no cowards fate t' have frighted bin; Nor with the peoples breath to be swol'n great, Nor at a drawn stiletto basely swear. He that dares this, nothing to him's unfit, But proud o' th' top of fortunes wheel may sit. Tully to thee, Rome's eloquent sole heir, The best of all that are, shall be, and were, I the worst poet send my best thanks and pray'r: Ev'n by how much the worst of poets I, By so much you the best of patrones be. Juvencius, thy fair sweet eyes If to my fill that I may kisse, Three hundred thousand times I'de kisse, Nor future age should cloy this blisse; No, not if thicker than ripe ears The harvest of our kisses bears. Cum puero bello praeconem qui videt esse, Quid credat, nisi se vendere discupere? With a fair boy a cryer we behold, What should we think, but he would not be sold? If you are Phoebus sister, Delia, pray, This my request unto the Sun convay: O Delphick god, I built thy marble fane, And sung thy praises with a gentle cane, Now, if thou art divine Apollo, tell, Where he, whose purse is empty, may go fill. Parent and Prince of Heav'n, O lead, I pray, Where ere you please, I follow and obey. Active I go, sighing, if you gainsay, And suffer bad what to the good was law. Fates lead the willing, but unwilling draw. As once I bad good morning to the day, O' th' sudden Roscius breaks in a bright ray: Gods with your favour, I've presum'd to see A mortal fairer then a deitie. With looks and hands a satyre courts the boy, Who draws back his unwilling cheek as coy. Although of marble hewn, whom move not they? The boy ev'n seems to weep, the satyre, pray. Phoebus me in somnis vetuit potare Lyaeum, Pareo praeceptis: tunc bibo cum vigilo. Phoebus asleep forbad me wine to take: I yield; and now am only drunk awake. On the Sicilian strand a hare well wrought Before the hounds was by a dog-fish caught; Quoth she: all rape of sea and earth's on me, Perhaps of heav'n, if there a dog-star be. The Cynicks narrow houshould stuffe of crutch, A stool and dish, was lumber thought too much: For whilst a hind drinks out on's palms o' th' strand He flings his dish: cries: I've one in my hand! A treasure found one, entring at death's gate, Triumphing leaves that cord, was meant his fate; But he the gold missing, which he did hide, The halter which he found he knit: so dy'd. Object adorable of charms! My sighs and tears may testifie my harms; But my respect forbids me to reveal. Ah, what a pain 'tis to conceal! And how I suffer worse then hell, To love, and not to dare to tell! If James, the king of wit, To see me thought not fit, Sure this the cause hath been, That, ravish'd with my merit, He thought I was all spirit, And so not to be seen. Vain painter, why dost strive my face to draw With busy hands? a goddesse eyes nere saw. Daughter of air and wind, I do rejoyce In empty shouts; without a mind a voice. Within your ears shrill echo I rebound, And, if you'l paint me like, then paint a sound. Cold poysons, to weak she thought for's grave; A fatal dose of quicksilver then she Mingles to hast his double destinie; Now whilst within themselves they are at strife, The deadly potion yields to that of life, And straight from th' hollow stomack both retreat To th' slippery pipes known to digested meat. Strange care o' th' gods the murth'resse doth avail! So, when fates please, ev'n double poysons heal. Because with bought books, sir, your study's fraught, A learned grammarian you would fain be thought; Nay then, buy lutes and strings; so you may play The merchant now, the fidler, the next day. Ask'd in the country what I did, I said: I view my men and meads, first having pray'd; Then each of mine hath his just task outlay'd; I read, Apollo court, I rouse my Muse; Then I anoynt me, and stript willing loose My self on a soft plat, from us'ry blest; I dine, drink, sing, play, bath, I sup, I rest. Fabullus, I will treat you handsomely Shortly, if the kind gods will favour thee. If thou dost bring with thee a del'cate messe, An olio or so, a pretty lass, Brisk wine, sharp tales, all sorts of drollery, These if thou bringst I say along with thee, You shall feed highly, friend: for, know, the ebbs Of my lank purse are full of spiders webs; But then again you shall receive clear love, Or what more grateful or more sweet may prove: For with an ointment I will favour thee My Venus's and Cupids gave to me, Of which once smelt, the gods thou wilt implore, Fabullus, that they'd make thee nose all ore. When brave chast Arria to her Poetus gave The sword from her own breast did bleeding wave: If there be faith, this wound smarts not, said she; But what you'l make, ah, that will murder me. When Portia her dear lord's sad fate did hear, And noble grief sought arms were hid from her: Know you not yet no hinderance of death is, Cato, I thought, enough had taught you this, So said, her thirsty lips drink flaming coales: Go now, deny me steel, officious fools! Whilst in an amber-shade the ant doth feast, A gummy drop ensnares the small wild-beast, A full reward of all her toyls hath she; 'Tis to be thought she would her self so die. Both lurks and shines, hid in an amber tear, The bee, in her own nectar prisoner; So she, who in her life time was contemn'd, Ev'n in her very funerals is gemm'd. And he is so. A fool, much bit by fleas, put out the light; You shall not see me now quoth he ; good night. That no fair woman will, wonder not why, Clap Rufus under thine her tender thigh; Not a silk gown shall once melt one of them, Nor the delights of a transparent gemme. A scurvy story kills thee, which doth tell, That in thine armpits a fierce goat doth dwell. Him they all fear full of an ugly stench: Nor 's 't fit he should lye with a handsome wench; Wherefore this noses cursed plague first crush, Or cease to wonder, why they fly you thus. My mistresse sayes she'll marry none but me; No, not if Jove himself a suitor be. She sayes so; but what women say to kind Lovers, we write in rapid streams and wind. That me alone you lov'd, you once did say, Nor should I to the king of gods give way. Then I lov'd thee not as a common dear, But as a father doth his children chear. Now thee I know, more bitterly I smart; Yet thou to me more light and cheaper art. What pow'r is this? that such a wrong should press Me to love more, yet wish thee well much lesse. I hate and love; would'st thou the reason know? I know not; but I burn, and feel it so. By thy fault is my mind brought to that pass, That it its office quite forgotten has: For be'est thou best, I cannot wish thee well, And be'est thou worst, then I must love thee still. Or what he dearer then his eyes doth prize, Ravish not what is dearer then his eyes, Or what he dearer then his eyes doth prize. Quintia is handsome, fair, tall, straight: all these Very particulars I grant with ease: But she all ore 's not handsome; here's her fault: In all that bulk there's not one corne of salt, Whilst Lesbia, fair and handsome too all ore, All graces and all wit from all hath bore. No one can boast her self so much belov'd, Truely as Lesbia my affections prov'd; No faith was ere with such a firm knot bound, As in my love on my part I have found. Sylo, pray pay me my ten sesterces, Then rant and roar as much as you shall please; Or if that mony takes pray, give ore To be a pimp, or else to rant and roar. To pay my love to thee, and pay it so, As honest men should what they justly owe, Were to write better of thy life, then can The assured'st pen of the most worthy man. Such was thy composition, such thy mind, Improv'd from vertue, and from vice refin'd; Thy youth an abstract of the world's best parts, Invr'd to arms and exercis'd to arts, Which, with the vigour of a man, became Thine and thy countries piramids of fame. Two glorious lights to guide our hopeful youth Into the paths of honour and of truth. These parts so rarely met made up in thee, What man should in his full perfection be: So sweet a temper into every sence And each affection breath'd an influence, As smooth'd them to a calme, which still withstood The ruffling passions of untamed blood, Without a wrinckle in thy face, to show Thy stable breast could a disturbance know. In fortune humble, constant in mischance; Expert in both, and both serv'd to advance Thy name by various trialls of thy spirit, And give the testimony of thy merit. Valiant to envy of the bravest men, And learned to an undisputed pen; Good as the best in both and great, but yet No dangerous courage nor offensive wit. These ever serv'd the one for to defend, The other, nobly to advance thy friend, Under which title I have found my name Fix'd in the living chronicle of fame To times succeeding: yet I hence must go, Displeas'd I cannot celebrate thee so. But what respect, acknowledgement and love, What these together, when improv'd, improve: Call it by any name so it express Ought like a tribute to thy worthyness, And may my bounden gratitude become LOVELACE, I offer at thy honour'd tomb. And though thy vertues many friends have bred To love thee liveing, and lament thee dead, In characters far better couch'd then these, Mine will not blott thy fame, nor theirs encrease. 'Twas by thine own great merits rais'd so high, That, maugre time and fate, it shall not dye. The rose and other fragrant flowers smell best, When they are pluck'd and worn in hand or brest, So this fair flow'r of vertue, this rare bud Of wit, smells now as fresh as when he stood; And in these Posthume-Poems lets us know, He on the banks of Helicon did grow. The beauty of his soul did correspond With his sweet out-side: nay, it went beyond. Lovelace, the minion of the Thespian dames, Apollo's darling, born with Enthean flames, Which in his numbers wave and shine so clear, As sparks refracted from rich gemmes appear; Such flames that may inspire, and atoms cast, To make new poets not like him in hast. Pardon blest shade , that I thus crowd to be 'Mong those that sin unto thy memory, And that I think unvalu'd reliques spread, And am the first that pillages the dead; Since who would be thy mourner as befits, But an officious sacriledge commits. How my tears strive to do thee fairer right, And from the characters divide my sight. Untill it dimmer a new torrent swells, And what obscur'd it, falls my spectacles Let the luxurious floods impulsive rise, As they would not be wept, but weep the eyes, The while earth melts, and we above it lye But the weak bubbles of mortalitie; Until our griefs are drawn up by the Sun, And that too drop the exhalation. How in thy dust we humble now our pride, And bring thee a whole people mortifi'd! For who expects not death, now thou art gone, Shows his low folly, not religion. Can the poetick heaven still hold on The golden dance, when the first mover's gon? And the snatch'd fires which circularly hurl'd In their strong rapture glimmer to the world, And not stupendiously rather rise The tapers unto these solemnities? Can the chords move in tune, when thou dost dye, At once their universal harmony? But where Apollo's harp with murmur laid, Had to the stones a melody convey'd, They by some pebble summon'd would reply In loud results to every battery; Thus do we come unto thy marble room, To eccho from the musick of thy tombe. May we dare speak thee dead, that wouldest be In thy remove only not such as we? No wonder, the advance is from us hid; Earth could not lift thee higher then it did! And thou, that didst grow up so ever nigh, Art but now gone to immortality! So near to where thou art, thou here didst dwell, The change to thee is less perceptible. Thy but unably-comprehending clay, To what could not be circumscrib'd, gave way, And the more spacious tennant to return, Crack'd in the two restrain'd estate its urn. That is but left to a successive trust; The soul's first buried in his bodies dust. Thou more thy self, now thou art less confin'd, Art not concern'd in what is left behind; While we sustain the losse that thou art gone, Un-essenc'd in the separation; And he that weeps thy funerall, in one Is pious to the widdow'd nation. And under what now covert must I sing, Secure as if beneath a cherub's wing; When thou hast tane thy flight hence, and art nigh In place to some related hierarchie, Where a bright wreath of glories doth but set Upon thy head an equal coronet; And thou, above our humble converse gon, Canst but be reach'd by contemplation. Our lutes as thine was touch'd were vocall by, And thence receiv'd the soul by sympathy, That did above the threds inspiring creep, And with soft whispers broke the am'rous sleep; Which now no more mov'd with the sweet surprise Awake into delicious rapsodies; But with their silent mistress do comply, And fast in undisturbed slumbers lye. How from thy first ascent thou didst disperse A blushing warmth throughout the universe, While near the morns Lucasta's fires did glow, And to the earth a purer dawn did throw. We ever saw thee in the roll of fame Advancing thy already deathless name; And though it could but be above its fate, Thou would'st, however, super-errogate. Now as in Venice, when the wanton State Before a Spaniard spread their crowded plate, He made it the sage business of his eye To find the root of the wild treasury; So learn't from that exchequer but the more To rate his masters vegetable ore. Thus when the Greek and Latin muse we read, As but the cold inscriptions of the dead, We to advantage then admired thee, Who did'st live on still with thy poesie; And in our proud enjoyments never knew The end of the unruly wealth that grew. But now we have the last dear ingots gain'd, And the free vein however rich is drein'd; Though what thou hast bequeathed us, no space Of this worlds span of time shall ere embrace. But as who sometimes knew not to conclude Upon the waters strange vicissitude, Did to the ocean himself commit, That it might comprehend what could not it, So we in our endeavours must out-done Be swallowed up within thy Helicon. Thou, who art layd up in thy precious cave, And from the hollow spaces of thy grave, We still may mourn in tune, but must alone Hereafter hope to quaver out a grone; No more the chirping sonnets with shrill notes Must henceforth volley from our treble throtes; But each sad accent must be humour'd well To the deep solemn organ of thy cell. Why should some rude hand carve thy sacred stone, And there incise a cheap inscription? When we can shed the tribute of our tears So long, till the relenting marble wears; Which shall such order in their cadence keep, That they a native epitaph shall weep; Untill each letter spelt distinctly lyes, Cut by the mystick droppings of our eyes. Me thinks, when kings, prophets, and poets dye, We should not bid men weep, nor ask them why, But the great loss should by instinct impair The nations, like a pestilential ayr, And in a moment men should feel the cramp Of grief, like persons poyson'd with a damp. All things in nature should their death deplore, And the sun look less lovely than before; The fixed stars should change their constant spaces, And comets cast abroad their flagrant faces. Yet still we see princes and poets fall Without their proper pomp of funerall; Men look about, as if they nere had known The poets lawrell or the princes crown; Lovelace hath long been dead, and he can be Oblig'd to no man for an elegie. Are you all turn'd to silence, or did he Retain the only sap of poesie, That kept all branches living? must his fall Set an eternal period upon all? So when a spring-tide doth begin to fly From the green shoar, each neighbouring creek grows dry. But why do I so pettishly detract An age that is so perfect, so exact? In all things excellent, it is a fame Or glory to deceased Lovelace name: For he is weak in wit, who doth deprave Anothers worth to make his own seem brave; And this was not his aim: nor is it mine. I now conceive the scope of their designe, Which is with one consent to bring and burn Contributary incence on his urn, Where each mans love and fancy shall be try'd, As when great Johnson or brave Shakespear dyed. Wits must unite: for ignorance, we see, Hath got a great train of artillerie: Yet neither shall nor can it blast the fame And honour of deceased Lovelace name, Whose own LUCASTA can support his credit Amongst all such who knowingly have read it; But who that praise can by desert discusse Due to those poems that are posthumous? And if the last conceptions are the best, Those by degrees do much transcend the rest; So full, so fluent, that they richly sute With Orpheus lire, or with Anacreons lute, And he shall melt his wing, that shall aspire To reach a fancy or one accent higher. Holland and France have known his nobler parts, And found him excellent in arms and arts. To sum up all, few men of fame but know, like Lovelace, wielded both the sword and the pen. Thy pious hand, planting fraternal bayes, Deserving is of most egregious praise; Since 'tis the organ doth to us convey From a descended sun so bright a ray. Clear spirit! how much we are bound to thee For this so great a liberalitie, The truer worth of which by much exceeds The western wealth, which such contention breeds! Like the Infusing-God, from the well-head Of poesie you have besprinkled Our brows with holy drops, the very last, Which from your Brother's happy pen were cast: Yet as the last, the best; such matchlesse skill From his divine alembick did distill. Your honour'd Brother in the Elyzian shade Will joy to know himself a laureat made By your religious care, and that his urn Doth him on earth immortal life return. Your self you have a good physician shown To his much grieved friends and to your own, In giving this elixir'd medecine, For greatest grief a soveraign anodine. Sir, from your Brother y' have convey'd us bliss; Now, since your genius so concurs with his, Let your own quill our next enjoyments frame; All must be rich, that's grac'd with Lovelace name. Great son of Mars, and of Minerva too! With what oblations must we come to woo Thy sacred soul to look down from above, And see how much thy memory we love, Whose happy pen so pleased amorous ears, And, lifting bright LUCASTA to the sphears, Her in the star-bespangled orb did set Above fair Ariadnes coronet, Leaving a pattern to succeeding wits, By which to sing forth their Pythonick fits. Shall we bring tears and sighs? no, no! then we Should but bemone our selves for loosing thee, Or else thy happiness seem to deny, Or to repine at thy felicity. Then, whilst we chant out thine immortal praise, Our offerings shall be onely sprigs of bays; And if our tears will needs their brinks out-fly, We'l weep them forth into an elegy, To tell the world, how deep fates wounded wit, When Atropos the lovely Lovelace hit! How th' active fire, which cloath'd thy gen'rous mind, Consum'd the water, and the earth calcin'd Untill a stronger heat by death was given, Which sublimated thy poor soul to heaven. Thou knew'st right well to guide the warlike steed, And yet could'st court the Muses with full speed And such success, that the inspiring Nine Have fill'd their Thespian fountain so with brine. Henceforth we can expect no lyrick lay, But biting satyres through the world must stray. Bellona joyns with fair Erato too, And with the Destinies do keep adoe, Whom thus she queries: could not you awhile Reprieve his life, until another file Of poems such as these had been drawn up? The fates reply'd that thou wert taken up, A sacrifice unto the deities; Since things most perfect please their holy eyes, And that no other victim could be found With so much learning and true virtue crown'd. Since it is so, in peace for ever rest; Tis very just that God should have the best. Lovelace is dead! then let the world return To its first chaos, mufled in its urn; The stars and elements together lye, Drench'd in perpetual obscurity, And the whole machine in confusion be, May the great eye of day weep out his light, Pale Cynthia leave the regiment of night, The galaxia, all in sables dight, Send forth no corruscations to our sight, The Sister-Graces and the sacred Nine, Statu'd with grief, attend upon his shrine, Whose worth, whose loss, should we but truly rate, 'Twould puzzle our arithmetic to state Th' accompt of vertu's so transcendent high, Number and value reach infinity. Did I pronounce him dead! no, no! he lives, And from his aromatique cell he gives Spice-breathed fumes, whose odoriferous scent In zephre-gales which never can be spent Doth spread it self abroad, and much out-vies The eastern bird in her self-sacrifice; Or Father Phoebus, who to th' world derives Such various and such multiformed lives, Took notice that brave Lovelace did inspire The universe with his Promethean fire, And snatcht him hence, before his thread was spun, En'ving that here should be another Sun. Tread reader gently, gently ore The happy dust beneath this floor: For in this narrow vault is set An alablaster cabinet, Wherein both arts and arms were put, Like Homers Iliads in a nut, Till Death with slow and easie pace And now, transform'd, he doth arise A constellation in the skies, Teaching the blinded world the way, Through night, to startle into day: And shipwrackt shades, with steady hand, He steers unto th' Elizian land. <|endofpoem|> From fairest creatures we desire increase, That thereby beauty's rose might never die, But as the riper should by time decease, His tender heir might bear his memory: But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes, Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel, Making a famine where abundance lies, Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel: Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament, And only herald to the gaudy spring, Within thine own bud buriest thy content, Pity the world, or else this glutton be, To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee. When forty winters shall besiege thy brow, And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now, Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held: Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies, Where all the treasure of thy lusty days; To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes, Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise. How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use, If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,' Proving his beauty by succession thine! This were to be new made when thou art old, And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold. Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest Now is the time that face should form another; Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother. For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? Or who is he so fond will be the tomb, Of his self-love to stop posterity? Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee Calls back the lovely April of her prime; So thou through windows of thine age shalt see, Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time. But if thou live, remember'd not to be, Die single and thine image dies with thee. Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy? Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend, And being frank she lends to those are free: The bounteous largess given thee to give? Profitless usurer, why dost thou use So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live? For having traffic with thy self alone, Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive: Then how when nature calls thee to be gone, What acceptable audit canst thou leave? Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee, Which, used, lives th' executor to be. Those hours, that with gentle work did frame The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell, Will play the tyrants to the very same And that unfair which fairly doth excel; For never-resting time leads summer on To hideous winter, and confounds him there; Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone, Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where: Then were not summer's distillation left, A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft, Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was: But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet, Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet. Then let not winter's ragged hand deface, In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd: Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd. That use is not forbidden usury, Which happies those that pay the willing loan; That's for thy self to breed another thee, Or ten times happier, be it ten for one; Ten times thy self were happier than thou art, If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee: Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart, Leaving thee living in posterity? Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir. Lo! in the orient when the gracious light Lifts up his burning head, each under eye Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, Serving with looks his sacred majesty; And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill, Resembling strong youth in his middle age, Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, Attending on his golden pilgrimage: But when from highmost pitch, with weary car, Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day, The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are From his low tract, and look another way: So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon: Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son. Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly? Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy: Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly, Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy? If the true concord of well-tuned sounds, By unions married, do offend thine ear, They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. Mark how one string, sweet husband to another, Strikes each in each by mutual ordering; Resembling sire and child and happy mother, Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing: Whose speechless song being many, seeming one, Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.' Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye, That thou consum'st thy self in single life? Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die, The world will wail thee like a makeless wife; The world will be thy widow and still weep That thou no form of thee hast left behind, When every private widow well may keep By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind: Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it; But beauty's waste hath in the world an end, And kept unused the user so destroys it. No love toward others in that bosom sits That on himself such murd'rous shame commits. For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any, Who for thy self art so unprovident. Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many, But that thou none lov'st is most evident: For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate, That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire, Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate Which to repair should be thy chief desire. O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind: Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love? Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind, Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove: Make thee another self for love of me, That beauty still may live in thine or thee. As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st, In one of thine, from that which thou departest; And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st, Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest, Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase; Without this folly, age, and cold decay: If all were minded so, the times should cease And threescore year would make the world away. Let those whom nature hath not made for store, Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish: Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more; Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish: She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby, Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die. When I do count the clock that tells the time, And see the brave day sunk in hideous night; When I behold the violet past prime, And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white; When lofty trees I see barren of leaves, Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, And summer's green all girded up in sheaves, Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard, Then of thy beauty do I question make, That thou among the wastes of time must go, Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake And die as fast as they see others grow; And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence. O! that you were your self; but, love you are No longer yours, than you your self here live: Against this coming end you should prepare, And your sweet semblance to some other give: So should that beauty which you hold in lease Find no determination; then you were Yourself again, after yourself's decease, When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. Who lets so fair a house fall to decay, Which husbandry in honour might uphold, Against the stormy gusts of winter's day And barren rage of death's eternal cold? O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know, You had a father: let your son say so. Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck; And yet methinks I have astronomy, But not to tell of good or evil luck, Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality; Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well By oft predict that I in heaven find: But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, And constant stars in them I read such art As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive, If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert'; Or else of thee this I prognosticate: 'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.' When I consider every thing that grows Holds in perfection but a little moment, That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows Whereon the stars in secret influence comment; When I perceive that men as plants increase, Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky, Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, And wear their brave state out of memory; Then the conceit of this inconstant stay Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, Where wasteful Time debateth with decay To change your day of youth to sullied night, And all in war with Time for love of you, As he takes from you, I engraft you new. But wherefore do not you a mightier way Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time? And fortify your self in your decay With means more blessed than my barren rhyme? Now stand you on the top of happy hours, And many maiden gardens, yet unset, With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers, Much liker than your painted counterfeit: So should the lines of life that life repair, Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen, Neither in inward worth nor outward fair, Can make you live your self in eyes of men. To give away yourself, keeps yourself still, And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill. Who will believe my verse in time to come, If it were fill'd with your most high deserts? Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts. If I could write the beauty of your eyes, And in fresh numbers number all your graces, The age to come would say 'This poet lies; Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.' So should my papers, yellow'd with their age, Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue, And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage And stretched metre of an antique song: But were some child of yours alive that time, You should live twice, in it, and in my rhyme. Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate: Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And summer's lease hath all too short a date: Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimm'd, And every fair from fair sometime declines, By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd: But thy eternal summer shall not fade, Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st, Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade, When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st, So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see, So long lives this, and this gives life to thee. Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws, And make the earth devour her own sweet brood; Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood; Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets, And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time, To the wide world and all her fading sweets; But I forbid thee one most heinous crime: O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow, Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen; Him in thy course untainted do allow For beauty's pattern to succeeding men. Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong, My love shall in my verse ever live young. A woman's face with nature's own hand painted, Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion; A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted With shifting change, as is false women's fashion: An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth; A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling, Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth. And for a woman wert thou first created; Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting, And by addition me of thee defeated, By adding one thing to my purpose nothing. But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure, Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure. So is it not with me as with that Muse, Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse, Who heaven itself for ornament doth use And every fair with his fair doth rehearse, Making a couplement of proud compare' With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems, With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare, That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems. O! let me, true in love, but truly write, And then believe me, my love is as fair As any mother's child, though not so bright As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air: Let them say more that like of hearsay well; I will not praise that purpose not to sell. My glass shall not persuade me I am old, So long as youth and thou are of one date; But when in thee time's furrows I behold, Then look I death my days should expiate. For all that beauty that doth cover thee, Is but the seemly raiment of my heart, Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me: How can I then be elder than thou art? O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary As I, not for myself, but for thee will; Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary As tender nurse her babe from faring ill. Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain, Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again. As an unperfect actor on the stage, Who with his fear is put beside his part, Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart; So I, for fear of trust, forget to say The perfect ceremony of love's rite, And in mine own love's strength seem to decay, O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might. O! let my looks be then the eloquence Who plead for love, and look for recompense, More than that tongue that more hath more express'd. O! learn to read what silent love hath writ: To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit. Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd, Thy beauty's form in table of my heart; My body is the frame wherein 'tis held, And perspective it is best painter's art. For through the painter must you see his skill, To find where your true image pictur'd lies, Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still, That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes. Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done: Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee; Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art, They draw but what they see, know not the heart. Let those who are in favour with their stars Of public honour and proud titles boast, Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most. Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread But as the marigold at the sun's eye, And in themselves their pride lies buried, For at a frown they in their glory die. The painful warrior famoused for fight, After a thousand victories once foil'd, Is from the book of honour razed quite, And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd: Then happy I, that love and am belov'd, Where I may not remove nor be remov'd. Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit, To thee I send this written embassage, To witness duty, not to show my wit: Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it, But that I hope some good conceit of thine In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it: Till whatsoever star that guides my moving, Points on me graciously with fair aspect, And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving, To show me worthy of thy sweet respect: Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee; Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me. Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed, The dear respose for limbs with travel tir'd; But then begins a journey in my head To work my mind, when body's work's expired: For then my thoughts from far where I abide Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee, And keep my drooping eyelids open wide, Looking on darkness which the blind do see: Save that my soul's imaginary sight Presents thy shadow to my sightless view, Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new. Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind, For thee, and for myself, no quiet find. How can I then return in happy plight, That am debarre'd the benefit of rest? When day's oppression is not eas'd by night, But day by night and night by day oppress'd, And each, though enemies to either's reign, Do in consent shake hands to torture me, The one by toil, the other to complain How far I toil, still farther off from thee. I tell the day, to please him thou art bright, And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven: So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night, When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even. But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer, And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger. When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes I all alone beweep my outcast state, And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, And look upon myself, and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd, Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope, With what I most enjoy contented least; Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising, Haply I think on thee, and then my state, Like to the lark at break of day arising From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate,; For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings. When to the sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past, I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought, And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste: Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow, For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe, And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight: Then can I grieve at grievances foregone, And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan, Which I new pay as if not paid before. But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, All losses are restor'd and sorrows end. Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts, Which I by lacking have supposed dead; And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts, And all those friends which I thought buried. How many a holy and obsequious tear Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye, As interest of the dead, which now appear But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie! Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone, Who all their parts of me to thee did give, That due of many now is thine alone: Their images I lov'd, I view in thee, And thou all they hast all the all of me. If thou survive my well-contented day, When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover And shalt by fortune once more re-survey These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover, Compare them with the bett'ring of the time, And though they be outstripp'd by every pen, Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, Exceeded by the height of happier men. O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought: 'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age, A dearer birth than this his love had brought, To march in ranks of better equipage: But since he died and poets better prove, Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'. Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye, Kissing with golden face the meadows green, Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy; Anon permit the basest clouds to ride With ugly rack on his celestial face, And from the forlorn world his visage hide, Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace: Even so my sun one early morn did shine, With all triumphant splendour on my brow; But out! alack! he was but one hour mine, The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now. Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth; Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth. Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day, And make me travel forth without my cloak, To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke? 'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face, For no man well of such a salve can speak, That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace: Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief; Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss: The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief To him that bears the strong offence's cross. Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds. No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done: Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud: Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. All men make faults, and even I in this, Authorizing thy trespass with compare, Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss, Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are; For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense, Thy adverse party is thy advocate, And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence: Such civil war is in my love and hate, That I an accessary needs must be, To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me. Let me confess that we two must be twain, Although our undivided loves are one: So shall those blots that do with me remain, Without thy help, by me be borne alone. In our two loves there is but one respect, Though in our lives a separable spite, Which though it alter not love's sole effect, Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight. I may not evermore acknowledge thee, Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame, Nor thou with public kindness honour me, Unless thou take that honour from thy name: But do not so, I love thee in such sort, As thou being mine, mine is thy good report. As a decrepit father takes delight To see his active child do deeds of youth, So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite, Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth; For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, Or any of these all, or all, or more, Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit, I make my love engrafted, to this store: So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd, Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give That I in thy abundance am suffic'd, And by a part of all thy glory live. Look what is best, that best I wish in thee: This wish I have; then ten times happy me! How can my muse want subject to invent, While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse Thine own sweet argument, too excellent For every vulgar paper to rehearse? O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me Worthy perusal stand against thy sight; When thou thy self dost give invention light? Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth Than those old nine which rhymers invocate; And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth Eternal numbers to outlive long date. If my slight muse do please these curious days, The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise. O! how thy worth with manners may I sing, When thou art all the better part of me? What can mine own praise to mine own self bring? And what is't but mine own when I praise thee? Even for this, let us divided live, And our dear love lose name of single one, That by this separation I may give That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone. O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove, Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave, To entertain the time with thoughts of love, Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive, And that thou teachest how to make one twain, By praising him here who doth hence remain. Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all; What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call; All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more. Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest, I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest; But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest By wilful taste of what thyself refusest. I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief, Although thou steal thee all my poverty: And yet, love knows it is a greater grief To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury. Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes. Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits, When I am sometime absent from thy heart, Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits, For still temptation follows where thou art. Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won, Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd; And when a woman woos, what woman's son Will sourly leave her till he have prevail'd? Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear, And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth, Who lead thee in their riot even there Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth: Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee, Thine by thy beauty being false to me. That thou hast her it is not all my grief, And yet it may be said I loved her dearly; That she hath thee is of my wailing chief, A loss in love that touches me more nearly. Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye: Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her; And for my sake even so doth she abuse me, Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her. If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain, And losing her, my friend hath found that loss; Both find each other, and I lose both twain, And both for my sake lay on me this cross: But here's the joy; my friend and I are one; Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone. When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see, For all the day they view things unrespected; But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee, And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed. Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright, How would thy shadow's form form happy show To the clear day with thy much clearer light, When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so! How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made By looking on thee in the living day, When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay! All days are nights to see till I see thee, And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me. If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, Injurious distance should not stop my way; For then despite of space I would be brought, From limits far remote, where thou dost stay. No matter then although my foot did stand Upon the farthest earth remov'd from thee; For nimble thought can jump both sea and land, As soon as think the place where he would be. But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought, To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, But that so much of earth and water wrought, I must attend, time's leisure with my moan; Receiving nought by elements so slow But heavy tears, badges of either's woe. The other two, slight air, and purging fire Are both with thee, wherever I abide; The first my thought, the other my desire, These present-absent with swift motion slide. For when these quicker elements are gone In tender embassy of love to thee, My life, being made of four, with two alone Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy; Until life's composition be recur'd By those swift messengers return'd from thee, Who even but now come back again, assur'd, Of thy fair health, recounting it to me: This told, I joy; but then no longer glad, I send them back again, and straight grow sad. Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war, How to divide the conquest of thy sight; Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar, My heart mine eye the freedom of that right. My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie, A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes But the defendant doth that plea deny, And says in him thy fair appearance lies. To side this title is impannelled A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart; And by their verdict is determined The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part: As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part, And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart. Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, And each doth good turns now unto the other: When that mine eye is famish'd for a look, Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother, With my love's picture then my eye doth feast, And to the painted banquet bids my heart; Another time mine eye is my heart's guest, And in his thoughts of love doth share a part: So, either by thy picture or my love, Thy self away, art present still with me; For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move, And I am still with them, and they with thee; Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight. How careful was I when I took my way, Each trifle under truest bars to thrust, That to my use it might unused stay From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust! Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief, Thou best of dearest, and mine only care, Art left the prey of every vulgar thief. Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest, Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art, Within the gentle closure of my breast, From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part; And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear, For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear. Against that time, if ever that time come, When I shall see thee frown on my defects, When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum, Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects; Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass, And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye, When love, converted from the thing it was, Shall reasons find of settled gravity; Against that time do I ensconce me here, Within the knowledge of mine own desert, And this my hand, against my self uprear, To guard the lawful reasons on thy part: To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws, Since why to love I can allege no cause. How heavy do I journey on the way, When what I seek, my weary travel's end, Doth teach that ease and that repose to say, 'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!' The beast that bears me, tired with my woe, Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me, As if by some instinct the wretch did know His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee: The bloody spur cannot provoke him on, That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide, Which heavily he answers with a groan, More sharp to me than spurring to his side; For that same groan doth put this in my mind, My grief lies onward, and my joy behind. Thus can my love excuse the slow offence Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed: From where thou art why should I haste me thence? Till I return, of posting is no need. O! what excuse will my poor beast then find, When swift extremity can seem but slow? Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind, In winged speed n:motion shall I know, Then can no horse with my desire keep pace; Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made, Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race; But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade, 'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow, Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.' So am I as the rich, whose blessed key, Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure, The which he will not every hour survey, For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure. Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, Since, seldom coming in that long year set, Like stones of worth they thinly placed are, So is the time that keeps you as my chest, Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, To make some special instant special-blest, By new unfolding his imprison'd pride. Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope, Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope. What is your substance, whereof are you made, That millions of strange shadows on you tend? Since every one, hath every one, one shade, And you but one, can every shadow lend. Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit Is poorly imitated after you; On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, And you in Grecian tires are painted new: Speak of the spring, and foison of the year, The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth appear; And you in every blessed shape we know. In all external grace you have some part, But you like none, none you, for constant heart. O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem By that sweet ornament which truth doth give. The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem For that sweet odour, which doth in it live. The canker blooms have full as deep a dye As the perfumed tincture of the roses. Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly When summer's breath their masked buds discloses: But, for their virtue only is their show, They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade; Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so; Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made: And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth. Not marble, nor the gilded monuments Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme; But you shall shine more bright in these contents When wasteful war shall statues overturn, And broils root out the work of masonry, Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn The living record of your memory. 'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room Even in the eyes of all posterity That wear this world out to the ending doom. So, till the judgment that yourself arise, You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes. Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said Thy edge should blunter be than appetite, Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd, To-morrow sharpened in his former might: So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness, To-morrow see again, and do not kill The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness. Let this sad interim like the ocean be Which parts the shore, where two contracted new Come daily to the banks, that when they see Return of love, more blest may be the view; Or call it winter, which being full of care, Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare. Being your slave what should I do but tend, Upon the hours, and times of your desire? I have no precious time at all to spend; Nor services to do, till you require. Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour, Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, Nor think the bitterness of absence sour, When you have bid your servant once adieu; Nor dare I question with my jealous thought Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought Save, where you are, how happy you make those. So true a fool is love, that in your will, Though you do anything, he thinks no ill. That god forbid, that made me first your slave, I should in thought control your times of pleasure, Or at your hand the account of hours to crave, Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure! O! let me suffer, being at your beck, The imprison'd absence of your liberty; And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check, Without accusing you of injury. Be where you list, your charter is so strong That you yourself may privilage your time To what you will; to you it doth belong Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime. I am to wait, though waiting so be hell, Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well. If there be nothing new, but that which is Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd, Which labouring for invention bear amiss The second burthen of a former child! O! that record could with a backward look, Even of five hundred courses of the sun, Show me your image in some antique book, Since mind at first in character was done! That I might see what the old world could say To this composed wonder of your frame; Wh'r we are mended, or wh'r better they, Or whether revolution be the same. O! sure I am the wits of former days, To subjects worse have given admiring praise. Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, So do our minutes hasten to their end; Each changing place with that which goes before, In sequent toil all forwards do contend. Nativity, once in the main of light, Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd, Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, And Time that gave doth now his gift confound. Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth, And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow: And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand. Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand. Is it thy will, thy image should keep open My heavy eyelids to the weary night? Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken, While shadows like to thee do mock my sight? Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee So far from home into my deeds to pry, To find out shames and idle hours in me, The scope and tenure of thy jealousy? O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great: It is my love that keeps mine eye awake: Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, To play the watchman ever for thy sake: For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere, From me far off, with others all too near. Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye And all my soul, and all my every part; And for this sin there is no remedy, It is so grounded inward in my heart. Methinks no face so gracious is as mine, No shape so true, no truth of such account; And for myself mine own worth do define, As I all other in all worths surmount. But when my glass shows me myself indeed Beated and chopp'd with tanned antiquity, Mine own self-love quite contrary I read; Self so self-loving were iniquity. 'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise, Painting my age with beauty of thy days. Against my love shall be as I am now, With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn; When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night; And all those beauties whereof now he's king Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight, Stealing away the treasure of his spring; For such a time do I now fortify Against confounding age's cruel knife, That he shall never cut from memory My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life: His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, And they shall live, and he in them still green. When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age; When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd, And brass eternal slave to mortal rage; When I have seen the hungry ocean gain Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, And the firm soil win of the watery main, Increasing store with loss, and loss with store; When I have seen such interchange of state, Or state itself confounded, to decay; Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate That Time will come and take my love away. This thought is as a death which cannot choose But weep to have, that which it fears to lose. Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, But sad mortality o'ersways their power, How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, Whose action is no stronger than a flower? O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out, Against the wrackful siege of battering days, When rocks impregnable are not so stout, Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays? O fearful meditation! where, alack, Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid? O! none, unless this miracle have might, That in black ink my love may still shine bright. Tired with all these, for restful death I cry, As to behold desert a beggar born, And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity, And purest faith unhappily forsworn, And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd, And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd, And strength by limping sway disabled And art made tongue-tied by authority, And folly doctor-like controlling skill, And simple truth miscall'd simplicity, And captive good attending captain ill: Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone, Save that, to die, I leave my love alone. Ah! wherefore with infection should he live, And with his presence grace impiety, That sin by him advantage should achieve, And lace itself with his society? Why should false painting imitate his cheek, And steel dead seeming of his living hue? Why should poor beauty indirectly seek Roses of shadow, since his rose is true? Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is, Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins? For she hath no exchequer now but his, And proud of many, lives upon his gains. O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had In days long since, before these last so bad. Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn, When beauty lived and died as flowers do now, Or durst inhabit on a living brow; Before the golden tresses of the dead, The right of sepulchres, were shorn away, To live a second life on second head; Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay: In him those holy antique hours are seen, Without all ornament, itself and true, Making no summer of another's green, Robbing no old to dress his beauty new; And him as for a map doth Nature store, To show false Art what beauty was of yore. Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend; All tongues the voice of souls give thee that due, Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend. Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd; But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own, In other accents do this praise confound By seeing farther than the eye hath shown. They look into the beauty of thy mind, And that in guess they measure by thy deeds; Then churls their thoughts, although their eyes were kind, To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds: But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, The soil is this, that thou dost common grow. That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect, For slander's mark was ever yet the fair; The ornament of beauty is suspect, A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air. So thou be good, slander doth but approve Thy worth the greater being woo'd of time; For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, And thou present'st a pure unstained prime. Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd; Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, To tie up envy, evermore enlarg'd, If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show, Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe. No longer mourn for me when I am dead Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell Give warning to the world that I am fled From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell: Nay, if you read this line, remember not The hand that writ it, for I love you so, That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, If thinking on me then should make you woe. O! if, I say you look upon this verse, When I perhaps compounded am with clay, Do not so much as my poor name rehearse; But let your love even with my life decay; Lest the wise world should look into your moan, And mock you with me after I am gone. O! lest the world should task you to recite What merit lived in me, that you should love After my death, dear love, forget me quite, For you in me can nothing worthy prove; Unless you would devise some virtuous lie, To do more for me than mine own desert, And hang more praise upon deceased I O! lest your true love may seem false in this That you for love speak well of me untrue, My name be buried where my body is, And live no more to shame nor me nor you. For I am shamed by that which I bring forth, And so should you, to love things nothing worth. That time of year thou mayst in me behold When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. In me thou see'st the twilight of such day As after sunset fadeth in the west; Which by and by black night doth take away, Death's second self, that seals up all in rest. In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire, That on the ashes of his youth doth lie, As the death-bed, whereon it must expire, Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by. This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong, To love that well, which thou must leave ere long. But be contented: when that fell arrest Without all bail shall carry me away, My life hath in this line some interest, Which for memorial still with thee shall stay. When thou reviewest this, thou dost review The very part was consecrate to thee: The earth can have but earth, which is his due; My spirit is thine, the better part of me: So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, The prey of worms, my body being dead; The coward conquest of a wretch's knife, Too base of thee to be remembered,. The worth of that is that which it contains, And that is this, and this with thee remains. So are you to my thoughts as food to life, Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground; And for the peace of you I hold such strife As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found. Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure; Now counting best to be with you alone, Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure: Sometime all full with feasting on your sight, And by and by clean starved for a look; Possessing or pursuing no delight, Save what is had, or must from you be took. Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day, Or gluttoning on all, or all away. Why is my verse so barren of new pride, So far from variation or quick change? Why with the time do I not glance aside To new-found methods, and to compounds strange? Why write I still all one, ever the same, And keep invention in a noted weed, That every word doth almost tell my name, Showing their birth, and where they did proceed? O! know sweet love I always write of you, And you and love are still my argument; So all my best is dressing old words new, Spending again what is already spent: For as the sun is daily new and old, So is my love still telling what is told. Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste; These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear, And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste. The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show Of mouthed graves will give thee memory; Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know Time's thievish progress to eternity. Look! what thy memory cannot contain, Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain, To take a new acquaintance of thy mind. These offices, so oft as thou wilt look, Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book. So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse, And found such fair assistance in my verse As every alien pen hath got my use And under thee their poesy disperse. And heavy ignorance aloft to fly, Have added feathers to the learned's wing And given grace a double majesty. Yet be most proud of that which I compile, Whose influence is thine, and born of thee: In others' works thou dost but mend the style, And arts with thy sweet graces graced be; But thou art all my art, and dost advance As high as learning, my rude ignorance. Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid, My verse alone had all thy gentle grace; But now my gracious numbers are decay'd, And my sick Muse doth give an other place. I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument Deserves the travail of a worthier pen; Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent He robs thee of, and pays it thee again. He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give, And found it in thy cheek: he can afford No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live. Then thank him not for that which he doth say, Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay. O! how I faint when I of you do write, Knowing a better spirit doth use your name, And in the praise thereof spends all his might, To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame! But since your worth wide as the ocean is, The humble as the proudest sail doth bear, My saucy bark, inferior far to his, On your broad main doth wilfully appear. Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat, Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride; Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat, He of tall building, and of goodly pride: Then if he thrive and I be cast away, The worst was this, my love was my decay. Or I shall live your epitaph to make, Or you survive when I in earth am rotten; From hence your memory death cannot take, Although in me each part will be forgotten. Your name from hence immortal life shall have, Though I, once gone, to all the world must die: The earth can yield me but a common grave, When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie. Your monument shall be my gentle verse, Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read; And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse, When all the breathers of this world are dead; You still shall live, such virtue hath my pen, Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men. I grant thou wert not married to my Muse, And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook The dedicated words which writers use Of their fair subject, blessing every book. Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, Finding thy worth a limit past my praise; And therefore art enforced to seek anew Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days. And do so, love; yet when they have devis'd, What strained touches rhetoric can lend, Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend; And their gross painting might be better us'd Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd. I never saw that you did painting need, And therefore to your fair no painting set; I found, or thought I found, you did exceed That barren tender of a poet's debt: And therefore have I slept in your report, That you yourself, being extant, well might show How far a modern quill doth come too short, Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. This silence for my sin you did impute, For I impair not beauty being mute, When others would give life, and bring a tomb. There lives more life in one of your fair eyes Than both your poets can in praise devise. Who is it that says most, which can say more, Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you? In whose confine immured is the store Which should example where your equal grew. Lean penury within that pen doth dwell That to his subject lends not some small glory; But he that writes of you, if he can tell That you are you, so dignifies his story, Let him but copy what in you is writ, Not making worse what nature made so clear, And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, Making his style admired every where. You to your beauteous blessings add a curse, Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse. My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still, While comments of your praise richly compil'd, Reserve their character with golden quill, And precious phrase by all the Muses fil'd. I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words, And like unlettered clerk still cry 'Amen' To every hymn that able spirit affords, In polish'd form of well-refined pen. Hearing you praised, I say ''tis so, 'tis true,' And to the most of praise add something more; But that is in my thought, whose love to you, Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before. Then others, for the breath of words respect, Was it the proud full sail of his great verse, Bound for the prize of all too precious you, That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse, Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write, Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? No, neither he, nor his compeers by night Giving him aid, my verse astonished. He, nor that affable familiar ghost Which nightly gulls him with intelligence, As victors of my silence cannot boast; I was not sick of any fear from thence: But when your countenance fill'd up his line, Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine. Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing, And like enough thou know'st thy estimate, The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; My bonds in thee are all determinate. For how do I hold thee but by thy granting? And for that riches where is my deserving? The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, And so my patent back again is swerving. Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking; So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, Comes home again, on better judgement making. Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter, In sleep a king, but waking no such matter. When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light, And place my merit in the eye of scorn, Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight, And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn. With mine own weakness, being best acquainted, Upon thy part I can set down a story Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted; That thou in losing me shalt win much glory: And I by this will be a gainer too; For bending all my loving thoughts on thee, The injuries that to myself I do, Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me. Such is my love, to thee I so belong, That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong. Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, And I will comment upon that offence: Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt, Against thy reasons making no defence. Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill, To set a form upon desired change, As I'll myself disgrace; knowing thy will, I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange; Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell, Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong, And haply of our old acquaintance tell. For thee, against my self I'll vow debate, For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate. Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now; Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross, Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, And do not drop in for an after-loss: Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow, Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe; Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, To linger out a purpos'd overthrow. If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, When other petty griefs have done their spite, But in the onset come: so shall I taste At first the very worst of fortune's might; And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so. Some glory in their birth, some in their skill, Some in their wealth, some in their body's force, Some in their garments though new-fangled ill; Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse; And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure, Wherein it finds a joy above the rest: But these particulars are not my measure, All these I better in one general best. Thy love is better than high birth to me, Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs, Of more delight than hawks and horses be; And having thee, of all men's pride I boast: Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take All this away, and me most wretchcd make. But do thy worst to steal thyself away, For term of life thou art assured mine; And life no longer than thy love will stay, For it depends upon that love of thine. Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs, When in the least of them my life hath end. I see a better state to me belongs Than that which on thy humour doth depend: Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind, Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie. O! what a happy title do I find, Happy to have thy love, happy to die! But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot? Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not. So shall I live, supposing thou art true, Like a deceived husband; so love's face May still seem love to me, though alter'd new; Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place: For there can live no hatred in thine eye, Therefore in that I cannot know thy change. In many's looks, the false heart's history Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange. But heaven in thy creation did decree That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell; Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be, Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell. How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow, If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show! They that have power to hurt, and will do none, That do not do the thing they most do show, Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow; They rightly do inherit heaven's graces, And husband nature's riches from expense; They are the lords and owners of their faces, Others, but stewards of their excellence. The summer's flower is to the summer sweet, Though to itself, it only live and die, But if that flower with base infection meet, The basest weed outbraves his dignity: For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds. How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose, Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose. That tongue that tells the story of thy days, Making lascivious comments on thy sport, Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise; Naming thy name, blesses an ill report. O! what a mansion have those vices got Which for their habitation chose out thee, Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot And all things turns to fair that eyes can see! Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege; The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge. Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness; Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport; Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less: Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort. As on the finger of a throned queen So are those errors that in thee are seen To truths translated, and for true things deem'd. How many lambs might the stern wolf betray, If like a lamb he could his looks translate! How many gazers mightst thou lead away, if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state! But do not so; I love thee in such sort, As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report. How like a winter hath my absence been From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year! What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! What old December's bareness everywhere! And yet this time removed was summer's time; The teeming autumn, big with rich increase, Bearing the wanton burden of the prime, Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease: Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit; For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, And, thou away, the very birds are mute: Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer, That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near. From you have I been absent in the spring, When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim, Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing, That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him. Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell Of different flowers in odour and in hue, Could make me any summer's story tell, Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew: Nor did I wonder at the lily's white, Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; They were but sweet, but figures of delight, Drawn after you, you pattern of all those. Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away, As with your shadow I with these did play. The forward violet thus did I chide: Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, If not from my love's breath? The purple pride Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dy'd. The lily I condemned for thy hand, And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair; The roses fearfully on thorns did stand, One blushing shame, another white despair; A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both, And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath; But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth A vengeful canker eat him up to death. More flowers I noted, yet I none could see, But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee. Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long, To speak of that which gives thee all thy might? Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light? Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem, In gentle numbers time so idly spent; Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem And gives thy pen both skill and argument. Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey, If Time have any wrinkle graven there; If any, be a satire to decay, And make time's spoils despised every where. Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life, So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife. O truant Muse what shall be thy amends For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy'd? Both truth and beauty on my love depends; So dost thou too, and therein dignified. Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say, 'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd; Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay; But best is best, if never intermix'd'? Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee To make him much outlive a gilded tomb And to be prais'd of ages yet to be. Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how To make him seem long hence as he shows now. My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming; I love not less, though less the show appear; That love is merchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming, The owner's tongue doth publish every where. Our love was new, and then but in the spring, When I was wont to greet it with my lays; As Philomel in summer's front doth sing, And stops her pipe in growth of riper days: Not that the summer is less pleasant now Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, But that wild music burthens every bough, And sweets grown common lose their dear delight. Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue: Because I would not dull you with my song. Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth, That having such a scope to show her pride, The argument, all bare, is of more worth Than when it hath my added praise beside! O! blame me not, if I no more can write! Look in your glass, and there appears a face That over-goes my blunt invention quite, Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace. Were it not sinful then, striving to mend, To mar the subject that before was well? For to no other pass my verses tend Than of your graces and your gifts to tell; And more, much more, than in my verse can sit, Your own glass shows you when you look in it. To me, fair friend, you never can be old, For as you were when first your eye I ey'd, Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold, Have from the forests shook three summers' pride, Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd, In process of the seasons have I seen, Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd, Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand, Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd; So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd: For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred: Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead. Let not my love be call'd idolatry, Nor my beloved as an idol show, Since all alike my songs and praises be To one, of one, still such, and ever so. Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind, Still constant in a wondrous excellence; Therefore my verse to constancy confin'd, One thing expressing, leaves out difference. 'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument, 'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words; And in this change is my invention spent, Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords. Fair, kind, and true, have often liv'd alone, Which three till now, never kept seat in one. When in the chronicle of wasted time I see descriptions of the fairest wights, And beauty making beautiful old rime, In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights, Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow, I see their antique pen would have express'd Even such a beauty as you master now. So all their praises are but prophecies Of this our time, all you prefiguring; And for they looked but with divining eyes, They had not skill enough your worth to sing: For we, which now behold these present days, Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise. Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, Can yet the lease of my true love control, Supposed as forfeit to a confin'd doom. The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd, And the sad augurs mock their own presage; Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd, And peace proclaims olives of endless age. Now with the drops of this most balmy time, My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime, While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes: And thou in this shalt find thy monument, When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent. What's in the brain, that ink may character, Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit? What's new to speak, what now to register, That may express my love, or thy dear merit? Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine, I must each day say o'er the very same; Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine, Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name. So that eternal love in love's fresh case, Weighs not the dust and injury of age, Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, But makes antiquity for aye his page; Finding the first conceit of love there bred, Where time and outward form would show it dead. O! never say that I was false of heart, Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify, As easy might I from my self depart As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie: That is my home of love: if I have rang'd, Like him that travels, I return again; Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd, So that myself bring water for my stain. Never believe though in my nature reign'd, All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, That it could so preposterously be stain'd, To leave for nothing all thy sum of good; For nothing this wide universe I call, Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all. Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there, And made my self a motley to the view, Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, Made old offences of affections new; Most true it is, that I have look'd on truth Askance and strangely; but, by all above, These blenches gave my heart another youth, And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love. Now all is done, save what shall have no end: Mine appetite I never more will grind On newer proof, to try an older friend, A god in love, to whom I am confin'd. Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, Even to thy pure and most most loving breast. O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide, The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, That did not better for my life provide Than public means which public manners breeds. Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, And almost thence my nature is subdu'd To what it works in, like the dyer's hand: Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd; Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink, Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; No bitterness that I will bitter think, Nor double penance, to correct correction. Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye, Even that your pity is enough to cure me. Your love and pity doth the impression fill, Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow; For what care I who calls me well or ill, So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow? You are my all-the-world, and I must strive To know my shames and praises from your tongue; None else to me, nor I to none alive, That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong. In so profound abysm I throw all care Of others' voices, that my adder's sense To critic and to flatterer stopped are. Mark how with my neglect I do dispense: You are so strongly in my purpose bred, That all the world besides methinks are dead. Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind; And that which governs me to go about Doth part his function and is partly blind, Seems seeing, but effectually is out; For it no form delivers to the heart Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch: Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch; For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight, The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature, The mountain or the sea, the day or night: The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature. Incapable of more, replete with you, My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue. Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you, Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery? Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true, And that your love taught it this alchemy, To make of monsters and things indigest Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, Creating every bad a perfect best, As fast as objects to his beams assemble? O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing, And my great mind most kingly drinks it up: Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing, And to his palate doth prepare the cup: If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin That mine eye loves it and doth first begin. Those lines that I before have writ do lie, Even those that said I could not love you dearer: Yet then my judgment knew no reason why My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer. But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings, Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents, Divert strong minds to the course of altering things; Alas! why fearing of Time's tyranny, Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,' When I was certain o'er incertainty, Crowning the present, doubting of the rest? Love is a babe, then might I not say so, To give full growth to that which still doth grow? Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds, Or bends with the remover to remove: O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark, That looks on tempests and is never shaken; It is the star to every wandering bark, Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending sickle's compass come; Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom. If this be error and upon me prov'd, I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd. Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all, Wherein I should your great deserts repay, Forgot upon your dearest love to call, Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day; That I have frequent been with unknown minds, And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right; That I have hoisted sail to all the winds Which should transport me farthest from your sight. Book both my wilfulness and errors down, And on just proof surmise, accumulate; Bring me within the level of your frown, But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate; Since my appeal says I did strive to prove The constancy and virtue of your love. Like as, to make our appetite more keen, With eager compounds we our palate urge; As, to prevent our maladies unseen, We sicken to shun sickness when we purge; Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness, To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding; And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness To be diseas'd, ere that there was true needing. Thus policy in love, to anticipate The ills that were not, grew to faults assur'd, And brought to medicine a healthful state Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd; But thence I learn and find the lesson true, Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you. What potions have I drunk of Siren tears, Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within, Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears, Still losing when I saw myself to win! What wretched errors hath my heart committed, Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never! How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted, In the distraction of this madding fever! O benefit of ill! now I find true That better is, by evil still made better; And ruin'd love, when it is built anew, Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater. So I return rebuk'd to my content, And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent. That you were once unkind befriends me now, And for that sorrow, which I then did feel, Needs must I under my transgression bow, Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel. For if you were by my unkindness shaken, As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time; And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime. O! that our night of woe might have remember'd My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits, And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits! But that your trespass now becomes a fee; Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me. 'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd, When not to be receives reproach of being; And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing: For why should others' false adulterate eyes Give salutation to my sportive blood? Or on my frailties why are frailer spies, Which in their wills count bad what I think good? No, I am that I am, and they that level At my abuses reckon up their own: I may be straight though they themselves be bevel; By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown; Unless this general evil they maintain, All men are bad and in their badness reign. Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain Full character'd with lasting memory, Which shall above that idle rank remain, Beyond all date; even to eternity: Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart Have faculty by nature to subsist; Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd. That poor retention could not so much hold, Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score; Therefore to give them from me was I bold, To trust those tables that receive thee more: To keep an adjunct to remember thee Were to import forgetfulness in me. No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change: Thy pyramids built up with newer might To me are nothing novel, nothing strange; They are but dressings of a former sight. Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire What thou dost foist upon us that is old; And rather make them born to our desire Than think that we before have heard them told. Thy registers and thee I both defy, Not wondering at the present nor the past, For thy records and what we see doth lie, Made more or less by thy continual haste. This I do vow and this shall ever be; I will be true despite thy scythe and thee. If my dear love were but the child of state, As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate, Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd. No, it was builded far from accident; It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls Under the blow of thralled discontent, Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls: It fears not policy, that heretic, Which works on leases of short-number'd hours, But all alone stands hugely politic, That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers. To this I witness call the fools of time, Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime. Were't aught to me I bore the canopy, With my extern the outward honouring, Or laid great bases for eternity, Which proves more short than waste or ruining? Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour Lose all and more by paying too much rent For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour, Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent? No; let me be obsequious in thy heart, And take thou my oblation, poor but free, Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art, But mutual render, only me for thee. Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul When most impeach'd, stands least in thy control. O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his fickle hour; Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st. If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack, As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back, She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill. Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure! She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure: Her audit though delayed answered must be, And her quietus is to render thee. In the old age black was not counted fair, Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name; But now is black beauty's successive heir, For since each hand hath put on Nature's power, Fairing the foul with Art's false borrowed face, Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower, But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace. Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black, Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack, Sland'ring creation with a false esteem: Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe, That every tongue says beauty should look so. How oft when thou, my music, music play'st, Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st The wiry concord that mine ear confounds, Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap, To kiss the tender inward of thy hand, Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap, At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand! To be so tickled, they would change their state And situation with those dancing chips, O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips. Since saucy jacks so happy are in this, Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss. The expense of spirit in a waste of shame Is lust in action: and till action, lust Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame, Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust; Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight; Past reason hunted; and no sooner had, Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait, On purpose laid to make the taker mad: Mad in pursuit and in possession so; Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme; A bliss in proof, and prov'd, a very woe; Before, a joy propos'd; behind a dream. All this the world well knows; yet none knows well To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell. My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; Coral is far more red, than her lips red: If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun; If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head. I have seen roses damask'd, red and white, But no such roses see I in her cheeks; And in some perfumes is there more delight Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. I love to hear her speak, yet well I know That music hath a far more pleasing sound: I grant I never saw a goddess go, My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground: And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare, As any she belied with false compare. Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art, As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel; For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold, Thy face hath not the power to make love groan; To say they err I dare not be so bold, Although I swear it to myself alone. And to be sure that is not false I swear, A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face, One on another's neck, do witness bear Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place. In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds. Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me, Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain, Have put on black and loving mourners be, Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain. And truly not the morning sun of heaven Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east, Nor that full star that ushers in the even, Doth half that glory to the sober west, As those two mourning eyes become thy face: O! let it then as well beseem thy heart To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace, And suit thy pity like in every part. Then will I swear beauty herself is black, And all they foul that thy complexion lack. Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan For that deep wound it gives my friend and me! Is't not enough to torture me alone, But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be? Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken, And my next self thou harder hast engross'd: Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken; A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross'd: Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward, But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail; Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard; Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail: And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee, Perforce am thine, and all that is in me. So, now I have confess'd that he is thine, And I my self am mortgag'd to thy will, Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still: But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, For thou art covetous, and he is kind; He learn'd but surety-like to write for me, Under that bond that him as fast doth bind. The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use, And sue a friend came debtor for my sake; So him I lose through my unkind abuse. Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me: He pays the whole, and yet am I not free. Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,' And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus; More than enough am I that vex'd thee still, To thy sweet will making addition thus. Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? Shall will in others seem right gracious, And in my will no fair acceptance shine? The sea, all water, yet receives rain still, And in abundance addeth to his store; So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will' One will of mine, to make thy large will more. Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill; Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.' If thy soul check thee that I come so near, Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will', And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there; Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil. 'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love, Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one. In things of great receipt with ease we prove Among a number one is reckon'd none: Then in the number let me pass untold, Though in thy store's account I one must be; For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold That nothing me, a something sweet to thee: Make but my name thy love, and love that still, And then thou lov'st me for my name is 'Will.' Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes, That they behold, and see not what they see? They know what beauty is, see where it lies, Yet what the best is take the worst to be. If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks, Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride, Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks, Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied? Why should my heart think that a several plot, Which my heart knows the wide world's common place? Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not, To put fair truth upon so foul a face? In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd, And to this false plague are they now transferr'd. When my love swears that she is made of truth, I do believe her though I know she lies, That she might think me some untutor'd youth, Unlearned in the world's false subtleties. Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, Although she knows my days are past the best, Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue: On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed: But wherefore says she not she is unjust? And wherefore say not I that I am old? O! love's best habit is in seeming trust, And age in love, loves not to have years told: Therefore I lie with her, and she with me, And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be. O! call not me to justify the wrong That thy unkindness lays upon my heart; Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue: Use power with power, and slay me not by art, Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight, Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside: What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide? Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows Her pretty looks have been mine enemies; And therefore from my face she turns my foes, That they elsewhere might dart their injuries: Yet do not so; but since I am near slain, Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain. Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain; Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express The manner of my pity-wanting pain. If I might teach thee wit, better it were, Though not to love, yet, love to tell me so; As testy sick men, when their deaths be near, No news but health from their physicians know; For, if I should despair, I should grow mad, And in my madness might speak ill of thee; Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad, Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be. That I may not be so, nor thou belied, Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide. In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes, For they in thee a thousand errors note; But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise, Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote. Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted; Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone, Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited To any sensual feast with thee alone: But my five wits nor my five senses can Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man, Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be: Only my plague thus far I count my gain, That she that makes me sin awards me pain. Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate, Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving: O! but with mine compare thou thine own state, And thou shalt find it merits not reproving; Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine, That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine, Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents. Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee: Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows, Thy pity may deserve to pitied be. If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, By self-example mayst thou be denied! Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch One of her feather'd creatures broke away, Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch In pursuit of the thing she would have stay; Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent To follow that which flies before her face, Not prizing her poor infant's discontent; So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee, Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind; But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me, And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind; So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,' If thou turn back and my loud crying still. Two loves I have of comfort and despair, Which like two spirits do suggest me still: The better angel is a man right fair, The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill. To win me soon to hell, my female evil, Tempteth my better angel from my side, And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, Wooing his purity with her foul pride. And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend, Suspect I may, yet not directly tell; But being both from me, both to each friend, I guess one angel in another's hell: Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt, Till my bad angel fire my good one out. Those lips that Love's own hand did make, Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate', To me that languish'd for her sake: But when she saw my woeful state, Straight in her heart did mercy come, Chiding that tongue that ever sweet Was us'd in giving gentle doom; And taught it thus anew to greet; 'I hate' she alter'd with an end, That followed it as gentle day, Doth follow night, who like a fiend From heaven to hell is flown away. 'I hate', from hate away she threw, And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'. Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, My sinful earth these rebel powers array, Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay? Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess, Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end? Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss, And let that pine to aggravate thy store; Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; Within be fed, without be rich no more: So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, And Death once dead, there's no more dying then. My love is as a fever longing still, For that which longer nurseth the disease; Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, The uncertain sickly appetite to please. My reason, the physician to my love, Angry that his prescriptions are not kept, Hath left me, and I desperate now approve Desire is death, which physic did except. Past cure I am, now Reason is past care, And frantic-mad with evermore unrest; My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are, At random from the truth vainly express'd; For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright, Who art as black as hell, as dark as night. O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head, Which have no correspondence with true sight; Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled, That censures falsely what they see aright? If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, What means the world to say it is not so? If it be not, then love doth well denote Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no, How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true, That is so vexed with watching and with tears? No marvel then, though I mistake my view; The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears. O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind, Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find. Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not, When I against myself with thee partake? Do I not think on thee, when I forgot Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake? Who hateth thee that I do call my friend, On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon, Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend Revenge upon myself with present moan? What merit do I in my self respect, That is so proud thy service to despise, When all my best doth worship thy defect, Commanded by the motion of thine eyes? But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind,; Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind. O! from what power hast thou this powerful might, With insufficiency my heart to sway? To make me give the lie to my true sight, And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill, That in the very refuse of thy deeds There is such strength and warrantise of skill, That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds? Who taught thee how to make me love thee more, The more I hear and see just cause of hate? O! though I love what others do abhor, With others thou shouldst not abhor my state: If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me, More worthy I to be belov'd of thee. Love is too young to know what conscience is, Yet who knows not conscience is born of love? Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss, Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove: For, thou betraying me, I do betray My nobler part to my gross body's treason; My soul doth tell my body that he may Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason, But rising at thy name doth point out thee, As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride, He is contented thy poor drudge to be, To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side. No want of conscience hold it that I call Her 'love,' for whose dear love I rise and fall. In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn, But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing; In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn, In vowing new hate after new love bearing: But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most; For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee, And all my honest faith in thee is lost: For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness, Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy; And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness, Or made them swear against the thing they see; For I have sworn thee fair; more perjur'd I, To swear against the truth so foul a lie.! Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep: A maid of Dian's this advantage found, And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep In a cold valley-fountain of that ground; Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love, A dateless lively heat, still to endure, And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove Against strange maladies a sovereign cure. But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired, The boy for trial needs would touch my breast; I, sick withal, the help of bath desired, And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest, But found no cure, the bath for my help lies Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes. The little Love-god lying once asleep, Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand, Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand The fairest votary took up that fire Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd; And so the general of hot desire Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm'd. This brand she quenched in a cool well by, Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual, Growing a bath and healthful remedy, For men diseas'd; but I, my mistress' thrall, Came there for cure and this by that I prove, Love's fire heats water, water cools not love. <|endofpoem|> Your honour's in all duty, EVEN as the sun with purple-colour'd face Had ta'en his last leave of the weeping morn, Rose-cheek'd Adonis tried him to the chase; Hunting he lov'd, but love he laugh'd to scorn; Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him, And like a bold-fac'd suitor 'gins to woo him. 'Thrice fairer than myself,' thus she began, 'The field's chief flower, sweet above compare, Stain to all nymphs, more lovely than a man, More white and red than doves or roses are; Nature that made thee, with herself at strife, Saith that the world hath ending with thy life. 'Vouchsafe, thou wonder, to alight thy steed, And rein his proud head to the saddle-bow; If thou wilt deign this favour, for thy meed A thousand honey secrets shalt thou know: Here come and sit, where never serpent hisses; And being set, I'll smother thee with kisses: 'And yet not cloy thy lips with loath'd satiety, But rather famish them amid their plenty, Making them red and pale with fresh variety; Ten kisses short as one, one long as twenty: A summer's day will seem an hour but short, Being wasted in such time-beguiling sport.' With this she seizeth on his sweating palm, The precedent of pith and livelihood, And, trembling in her passion, calls it balm, Earth's sovereign salve to do a goddess good: Being so enrag'd, desire doth lend her force Courageously to pluck him from his horse. Over one arm the lusty courser's rein Under her other was the tender boy, Who blush'd and pouted in a dull disdain, With leaden appetite, unapt to toy; She red and hot as coals of glowing fire He red for shame, but frosty in desire. The studded bridle on a ragged bough Nimbly she fastens; O! how quick is love: The steed is stalled up, and even now To tie the rider she begins to prove: Backward she push'd him, as she would be thrust, And govern'd him in strength, though not in lust. So soon was she along, as he was down, Each leaning on their elbows and their hips: Now doth she stroke his cheek, now doth he frown, And 'gins to chide, but soon she stops his lips; And kissing speaks, with lustful language broken, 'If thou wilt chide, thy lips shall never open.' He burns with bashful shame; she with her tears Doth quench the maiden burning of his cheeks; Then with her windy sighs and golden hairs To fan and blow them dry again she seeks: He saith she is immodest, blames her miss; What follows more she murders with a kiss. Even as an empty eagle, sharp by fast, Tires with her beak on feathers, flesh and bone, Shaking her wings, devouring all in haste, Till either gorge be stuff'd or prey be gone; Even so she kiss'd his brow, his cheek, his chin, And where she ends she doth anew begin. Forc'd to content, but never to obey, Panting he lies, and breatheth in her face; She feedeth on the steam, as on a prey, And calls it heavenly moisture, air of grace; Wishing her cheeks were gardens full of flowers So they were dewd with such distilling showers. Look! how a bird lies tangled in a net, So fasten'd in her arms Adonis lies; Pure shame and aw'd resistance made him fret, Which bred more beauty in his angry eyes: Rain added to a river that is rank Perforce will force it overflow the bank. Still she entreats, and prettily entreats, For to a pretty ear she tunes her tale; Still is he sullen, still he lours and frets, 'Twixt crimson shame and anger ashy-pale; Being red she loves him best; and being white, Her best is better'd with a more delight. Look how he can, she cannot choose but love; And by her fair immortal hand she swears, From his soft bosom never to remove, Till he take truce with her contending tears, Which long have rain'd, making her cheeks all wet; And one sweet kiss shall pay this countless debt. Upon this promise did he raise his chin Like a dive-dapper peering through a wave, Who, being look'd on, ducks as quickly in; So offers he to give what she did crave; But when her lips were ready for his pay, He winks, and turns his lips another way. Never did passenger in summer's heat More thirst for drink than she for this good turn. Her help she sees, but help she cannot get; She bathes in water, yet her fire must burn: 'O! pity,' 'gan she cry, 'flint-hearted boy: 'Tis but a kiss I beg; why art thou coy? 'I have been woo'd, as I entreat thee now, Even by the stern and direful god of war, Whose sinewy neck in battle ne'er did bow, Who conquers where he comes in every jar; Yet hath he been my captive and my slave, And begg'd for that which thou unask'd shalt have. 'Over my altars hath he hung his lance, His batter'd shield, his uncontrolled crest, And for my sake hath learn'd to sport and dance To toy, to wanton, dally, smile, and jest; Scorning his churlish drum and ensign red Making my arms his field, his tent my bed. 'Thus he that overrul'd I oversway'd, Leading him prisoner in a red-rose chain: Strong-temper'd steel his stronger strength obey'd, Yet was he servile to my coy disdain. O! be not proud, nor brag not of thy might, For mastering her that foil'd the god of fight. Touch but my lips with those falr lips of thine, Though mine be not so fair, yet are they red, The kiss shall be thine own as well as mine: What seest thou in the ground? hold up thy head: Look in mine eyeballs, there thy beauty lies; Then why not lips on lips, since eyes in eyes? 'Art thou asham'd to kiss? then wink again, And I will wink; so shall the day seem night; Love keeps his revels where there are but twain; Be bold to play, our sport is not in sight: These blue-vein'd violets whereon we lean Never can blab, nor know not what we mean. 'The tender spring upon thy tempting lip Shows thee unripe, yet mayst thou well be tasted: Make use of time, let not advantage slip; Beauty within itself should not be wasted: Fair flowers that are not gather'd in their prime Rot and consume themselves in little time. 'Were I hard-favour'd, foul, or wrinkled-old, Ill-nurtur'd, crooked, churlish, harsh in voice, O'erworn, despised, rheumatic, and cold, Thick-sighted, barren, lean, and lacking juice, Then mightst thou pause, for then I were not for thee; But having no defects, why dost abhor me? 'Thou canst not see one winkle in my brow; Mine eyes are grey and bright, and quick in turning; My beauty as the spring doth yearly grow; My flesh is soft and plump, my marrow burning; My smooth moist hand, were it with thy hand felt. Would in thy palm dissolve, or seem to melt. 'Bid me discourse, I will enchant thine ear, Or like a fairy, trip upon the green, Or, like a nymph, with long dishevell'd hair, Dance on the sands, and yet no footing seen: Love is a spirit all compact of fire, Not gross to sink, but light, and will aspire. 'Witness this primrose bank whereon I lie; These forceless flowers like sturdy trees support me; Two strengthless doves will draw me through the sky, From morn till night, even where I list to sport me: Is love so light, sweet boy, and may it be That thou shouldst think it heavy unto thee? 'Is thine own heart to shine own face affected? Can thy right hand seize love upon thy left? Then woo thyself, be of thyself rejected, Steal thine own freedom, and complain on theft. Narcissus so himself himself forsook, And died to kiss his shadow in the brook. Dainties to taste, fresh beauty for the use, Herbs for their smell, and sappy plants to bear; Things growing to themselves are growth's abuse: Seeds spring from seeds, and beauty breedeth beauty; Thou wast begot; to get it is thy duty. 'Upon the earth's increase why shouldst thou feed, Unless the earth with thy increase be fed? By law of nature thou art bound to breed, That thine may live when thou thyself art dead; And so in spite of death thou dost survive, In that thy likeness still is left alive.' By this the love-sick queen began to sweat, For where they lay the shadow had forsook them, And Titan, tired in the mid-day heat With burning eye did hotly overlook them, Wishing Adonis had his team to guide, So he were like him and by Venus' side. And now Adonis with a lazy spright, And with a heavy, dark, disliking eye, His louring brows o'erwhelming his fair sight, Like misty vapours when they blot the sky, Souring his cheeks, cries, 'Fie! no more of love: The sun doth burn my face; I must remove.' 'Ay me,' quoth Venus, 'young, and so unkind! What bare excuses mak'st thou to be gone! I'll sigh celestial breath, whose gentle wind Shall cool the heat of this descending sun: I'll make a shadow for thee of my hairs; If they burn too, I'll quench them with my tears. 'The sun that shines from heaven shines but warm, And lo! I lie between that sun and thee: The heat I have from thence doth little harm, Thine eye darts forth the fire that burneth me; And were I not immortal, life were done Between this heavenly and earthly sun. 'Art thou obdurate, flinty, hard as steel? Nay, more than flint, for stone at rain relenteth: Art thou a woman's son, and canst not feel What 'tis to love? how want of love tormenteth? O! had thy mother borne so hard a mind, She had not brought forth thee, but died unkind. 'What am I that thou shouldst contemn me this? Or what great danger dwells upon my suit? What were thy lips the worse for one poor kiss? Speak, fair; but speak fair words, or else be mute: Give me one kiss, I'll give it thee again, And one for interest if thou wilt have twain. 'Fie! lifeless picture, cold and senseless stone, Well-painted idol, image dull and dead, Statue contenting but the eye alone, Thing like a man, but of no woman bred: Thou art no man, though of a man's complexion, For men will kiss even by their own direction.' This said, impatience chokes her pleading tongue, And swelling passion doth provoke a pause; Red cheeks and fiery eyes blaze forth her wrong; Being judge in love, she cannot right her cause: And now she weeps, and now she fain would speak, And now her sobs do her intendments break. Sometimes she shakes her head, and then his hand; Now gazeth she on him, now on the ground; Sometimes her arms infold him like a band: She would, he will not in her arms be bound; And when from thence he struggles to be gone, She locks her lily fingers one in one. 'Fondling,' she saith, 'since I have hemm'd thee here Within the circuit of this ivory pale, I'll be a park, and thou shalt be my deer; Feed where thou wilt, on mountain or in dale: Graze on my lips, and if those hills be dry, Stray lower, where the pleasant fountains lie. 'Within this limit is relief enough, Sweet bottom-grass and high delightful plain, Round rising hillocks, brakes obscure and rough, To shelter thee from tempest and from rain: Then be my deer, since I am such a park; No dog shall rouse thee, though a thousand bark.' At this Adonis smiles as in disdain, That in each cheek appears a pretty dimple: Love made those hollows, if himself were slain, He might be buried in a tomb so simple; Foreknowing well, if there he came to lie, Why, there Love liv'd, and there he could not die. These lovely caves, these round enchanting pits, Open'd their mouths to swallow Venus' liking. Being mad before, how doth she now for wits? Struck dead at first, what needs a second striking? Poor queen of love, in thine own law forlorn, To love a cheek that smiles at thee in scorn! Now which way shall she turn? what shall she say? Her words are done, her woes the more increasing; The time is spent, her object will away, And from her twining arms doth urge releasing: 'Pity,' she cries; 'some favour, some remorse!' Away he springs, and hasteth to his horse. But lo! from forth a copse that neighbours by, A breeding jennet, lusty, young, and proud, Adonis' tramping courier doth espy, And forth she rushes, snorts and neighs aloud: The strong-neck'd steed, being tied unto a tree, Breaketh his rein, and to her straight goes he. Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds, And now his woven girths he breaks asunder; The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds, Whose hollow womb resounds like heaven's thunder; The iron bit he crusheth 'tween his teeth, Controlling what he was controlled with. His ears up-prick'd; his braided hanging mane Upon his compass'd crest now stand on end; His nostrils drink the air, and forth again, As from a furnace, vapours doth he send: His eye, which scornfully glisters like fire, Shows his hot courage and his high desire. Sometime he trots, as if he told the steps, With gentle majesty and modest pride; Anon he rears upright, curvets and leaps, As who should say, 'Lo! thus my strength is tried; And this I do to captivate the eye Of the fair breeder that is standing by.' What recketh he his rider's angry stir, His flattering 'Holla', or his 'Stand, I say'? What cares he now for curb or pricking spur? For rich caparisons or trapping gay? He sees his love, and nothing else he sees, Nor nothing else with his proud sight agrees. Look, when a painter would surpass the life, In limning out a well-proportion'd steed, His art with nature's workmanship at strife, As if the dead the living should exceed; So did this horse excel a common one, In shape, in courage, colour, pace and bone. Round-hoof'd, short-jointed, fetlocks shag and long, Broad breast, full eye, small head, and nostril wide, High crest, short ears, straight legs and passing strong, Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide: Look, what a horse should have he did not lack, Save a proud rider on so proud a back. Sometimes he scuds far off, and there he stares; Anon he starts at stirring of a feather; To bid the wind a base he now prepares, And whe'r he run or fly they know not whether; For through his mane and tail the high wind sings, Fanning the hairs, who wave like feather'd wings. He looks upon his love, and neighs unto her; She answers him as if she knew his mind; Being proud, as females are, to see him woo her, She puts on outward strangeness, seems unkind, Spurns at his love and scorns the heat he feels, Beating his kind embracements with her heels. Then, like a melancholy malcontent, He vails his tail, that, like a falling plume, Cool shadow to his melting buttock lent: He stamps, and bites the poor flies in his fume. His love, perceiving how he is enrag'd, Grew kinder, and his fury was assuag'd. His testy master goeth about to take him; When lo! the unback'd breeder, full of fear, Jealous of catching, swiftly doth forsake him, With her the horse, and left Adonis there: As they were mad, unto the wood they hie them, Outstripping crows that strive to overfly them. All swoln with chafing, down Adonis sits, Banning his boisterous and unruly beast: And now the happy season once more fits, That love-sick Love by pleading may be blest; For lovers say, the heart hath treble wrong When it is barr'd the aidance of the tongue. An oven that is stopp'd, or river stay'd, Burneth more hotly, swelleth with more rage: So of concealed sorrow may be said; Free vent of words love's fire doth assuage; But when the heart's attorney once is mute The client breaks, as desperate in his suit. He sees her coming, and begins to glow, Even as a dying coal revives with wind, And with his bonnet hides his angry brow; Looks on the dull earth with disturbed mind, Taking no notice that she is so nigh, For all askance he holds her in his eye. O! what a sight it was, wistly to view How she came stealing to the wayward boy; To note the fighting conflict of her hue, How white and red each other did destroy: But now her cheek was pale, and by and by Now was she just before him as he sat, And like a lowly lover down she kneels; With one fair hand she heaveth up his hat, Her other tender hand his fair cheek feels: His tenderer cheek receives her soft hand's print, As apt as new-fall'n snow takes any dint. O! what a war of looks was then between them; Her eyes petitioners to his eyes suing; His eyes saw her eyes as they had not seen them; Her eyes woo'd still, his eyes disdain'd the wooing: With tears, which, chorus-like, her eyes did rain. Full gently now she takes him by the hand, A lily prison'd in a gaol of snow, Or ivory in an alabaster band; So white a friend engirts so white a foe: This beauteous combat, wilful and unwilling, Show'd like two silver doves that sit a-billing. Once more the engine of her thoughts began: 'O fairest mover on this mortal round, Would thou wert as I am, and I a man, My heart all whole as thine, thy heart my wound; For one sweet look thy help I would assure thee, Though nothing but my body's bane would cure thee.' 'Give me my hand,' saith he, 'why dost thou feel it?' 'Give me my heart,' saith she, 'and thou shalt have it; O! give it me, lest thy hard heart do steel it, And being steel'd, soft sighs can never grave it: Then love's deep groans I never shall regard, Because Adonis' heart hath made mine hard.' 'For shame,' he cries, 'let go, and let me go; My day's delight is past, my horse is gone, And 'tis your fault I am bereft him so: I pray you hence, and leave me here alone: For all my mind, my thought, my busy care, Is how to get my palfrey from the mare.' Thus she replies: 'Thy palfrey, as he should, Welcomes the warm approach of sweet desire: Affection is a coal that must be cool'd; Else, suffer'd, it will set the heart on fire: The sea hath bounds, but deep desire hath none; Therefore no marvel though thy horse be gone. 'How like a Jade he stood, tied to the tree, Servilely master'd with a leathern rein! But when he saw his love, his youth's fair fee, He held such petty bondage in disdain; Throwing the base thong from his bending crest, Enfranchising his mouth, his back, his breast. 'Who sees his true-love in her naked bed, Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white, But, when his glutton eye so full hath fed, His other agents aim at like delight? Who is so faint, that dare not be so bold To touch the fire, the weather being cold? 'Let me excuse thy courser, gentle boy; And learn of him, I heartily beseech thee, To take advantage on presented joy O learn to love, the lesson is but plain, And once made perfect, never lost again. 'I know not love,' quoth he, 'nor will not know it, Unless it be a boar, and then I chase it; 'Tis much to borrow, and I will not owe it; My love to love is love but to disgrace it; For I have heard it is a life in death, That laughs and weeps, and all but with a breath. 'Who wears a garment shapeless and unfinish'd? Who plucks the bud before one leaf put forth? If springing things be any jot diminish'd, They wither in their prime, prove nothing worth; The colt that's back'd and burden'd being young Loseth his pride, and never waxeth strong. 'You hurt my hand with wringing. Let us part, And leave this idle theme, this bootless chat: Remove your siege from my unyielding heart; To love's alarms it will not ope the gate: Dismiss your vows, your feigned tears, your flattery; For where a heart is hard they make no battery.' 'What! canst thou talk?' quoth she, 'hast thou a tongue? O! would thou hadst not, or I had no hearing; Thy mermaid's voice hath done me double wrong; I had my load before, now press'd with bearing: Melodious discord, heavenly tune, harsh-sounding, Ear's deep-sweet music, and heart's deep-sore wounding. 'Had I no eyes but ears, my ears would love That inward beauty and invisible; Or were I deaf, thy outward parts would move Each part in me that were but sensible: Though neither eyes nor ears, to hear nor see, Yet should I be in love by touching thee. 'Say, that the sense of feeling were bereft me, And that I could not see, nor hear, nor touch, And nothing but the very smell were left me, Yet would my love to thee be still as much; For from the stillitory of thy face excelling Comes breath perfum'd that breedeth love by smelling. 'But O! what banquet wert thou to the taste, Being nurse and feeder of the other four; Would they not wish the feast might ever last, And bid Suspicion double-lock the door, Lest Jealousy, that sour unwelcome guest, Should, by his stealing in, disturb the feast?' Once more the ruby-colour'd portal open'd, Which to his speech did honey passage yield, Like a red morn, that ever yet betoken'd Wrack to the seaman, tempest to the field, Sorrow to shepherds, woe unto the birds, Gusts and foul flaws to herdmen and to herds. This ill presage advisedly she marketh: Even as the wind is hush'd before it raineth, Or as the wolf doth grin before he barketh, Or as the berry breaks before it staineth, Or like the deadly bullet of a gun, His meaning struck her ere his words begun. And at his look she flatly falleth down For looks kill love, and love by looks reviveth; A smile recures the wounding of a frown; But blessed bankrupt, that by love so thriveth! The silly boy, believing she is dead And all amaz'd brake off his late intent, For sharply he did think to reprehend her, Which cunning love did wittily prevent: Fair fall the wit that can so well defend her! For on the grass she lies as she were slain Till his breath breatheth life in her again. He wrings her nose, he strikes her on the cheeks, He bends her fingers, holds her pulses hard, He chafes her lips; a thousand ways he seeks To mend the hurt that his unkindness marr'd: He kisses her; and she, by her good will, Will never rise, so he will kiss her still. The night of sorrow now is turn'd to day: Her two blue windows faintly she up-heaveth, Like the fair sun, when in his fresh array He cheers the morn, and all the world relieveth: And as the bright sun glorifies the sky, So is her face illumin'd with her eye; Whose beams upon his hairless face are fix'd, As if from thence they borrow'd all their shine. Were never four such lamps together mix'd, Had not his clouded with his brow's repine; But hers, which through the crystal tears gave light Shone like the moon in water seen by night. 'O! where am I?' quoth she, 'in earth or heaven, Or in the ocean drench'd, or in the fire? What hour is this? or morn or weary even? Do I delight to die, or life desire? But now I liv'd, and life was death's annoy; But now I died, and death was lively joy. 'O! thou didst kill me; kill me once again: Thy eyes' shrewd tutor, that hard heart of thine, Hath taught them scornful tricks, and such disdain, That they have murder'd this poor heart of mine; And these mine eyes, true leaders to their queen, But for thy piteous lips no more had seen. 'Long may they kiss each other for this cure! O! never let their crimson liveries wear; And as they last, their verdure still endure, To drive infection from the dangerous year: That the star-gazers, having writ on death, May say, the plague is banish'd by thy breath. 'Pure lips, sweet seals in my soft lips imprinted, What bargains may I make, still to be sealing? To sell myself I can be well contented, So thou wilt buy and pay and use good dealing; Which purchase if thou make, for fear of slips Set thy seal-manual on my wax-red lips. 'A thousand kisses buys my heart from me; And pay them at thy leisure, one by one. What is ten hundred touches unto thee? Are they not quickly told and quickly gone? Say, for non-payment that the debt should double, Is twenty hundred kisses such a trouble?' 'Fair queen,' quoth he, 'if any love you owe me, Measure my strangeness with my unripe years: Before I know myself, seek not to know me; No fisher but the ungrown fry forbears: The mellow plum doth fall, the green sticks fast, Or being early pluck'd is sour to taste. 'Look! the world's comforter, with weary gait His day's hot task hath ended in the west; The owl, night's herald, shrieks, 'tis very late; The sheep are gone to fold, birds to their nest, And coal-black clouds that shadow heaven's light Do summon us to part, and bid good night. 'Now let me say good night, and so say you; If you will say so, you shall have a kiss.' 'Good night,' quoth she; and ere he says adieu, The honey fee of parting tender'd is: Her arms do lend his neck a sweet embrace; Incorporate then they seem, face grows to face. Till, breathless, he disjoin'd, and backward drew The heavenly moisture, that sweet coral mouth, Whose precious taste her thirsty lips well knew, Whereon they surfeit, yet complain on drouth: He with her plenty press'd, she faint with dearth, Their lips together glu'd, fall to the earth. Now quick desire hath caught the yielding prey, And glutton-like she feeds, yet never filleth; Her lips are conquerors, his lips obey, Paying what ransom the insulter willeth; Whose vulture thought doth pitch the price so high, That she will draw his lips' rich treasure dry. And having felt the sweetness of the spoil, With blindfold fury she begins to forage; Her face doth reek and smoke, her blood doth boil, And careless lust stirs up a desperate courage; Planting oblivion, beating reason back, Forgetting shame's pure blush and honour's wrack. Hot, faint, and weary, with her hard embracing, Like a wild bird being tam'd with too much handling, Or like the froward infant still'd with dandling, He now obeys, and now no more resisteth, What wax so frozen but dissolves with tempering, And yields at last to every light impression? Things out of hope are compass'd oft with venturing, Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission: Affection faints not like a pale-fac'd coward, But then woos best when most his choice is froward. When he did frown, O! had she then gave over, Such nectar from his lips she had not suck'd. Foul words and frowns must not repel a lover; What though the rose have prickles, yet 'tis pluck'd: Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast, Yet love breaks through and picks them all at last. For pity now she can no more detain him; The poor fool prays her that he may depart: She is resolv'd no longer to restrain him, Bids him farewell, and look well to her heart, The which, by Cupid's bow she doth protest, He carries thence incaged in his breast. 'Sweet boy,' she says, 'this night I'll waste in sorrow, For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch. Tell me, Love's master, shall we meet to-morrow Say, shall we? shall we? wilt thou make the match?' He tells her, no; to-morrow he intends To hunt the boar with certain of his friends. 'The boar!' quoth she; whereat a sudden pale, Like lawn being spread upon the blushing rose, Usurps her cheeks, she trembles at his tale, And on his neck her yoking arms she throws: She sinketh down, still hanging by his neck, He on her belly falls, she on her back. Now is she in the very lists of love, Her champion mounted for the hot encounter: All is imaginary she doth prove, He will not manage her, although he mount her; That worse than Tantalus' is her annoy, To clip Elysium and to lack her joy. Even as poor birds, deceiv'd with painted grapes, Do surfeit by the eye and pine the maw, Even so she languisheth in her mishaps, As those poor birds that helpless berries saw. The warm effects which she in him finds missing, She seeks to kindle with continual kissing. But all in vain, good queen, it will not be: She hath assay'd as much as may be prov'd; Her pleading hath deserv'd a greater fee; She's Love, she loves, and yet she is not lov'd. 'Fie, fie!' he says, 'you crush me; let me go; You have no reason to withhold me so.' 'Thou hadst been gone,' quoth she, 'sweet boy, ere this, But that thou told'st me thou wouldst hunt the boar. O! be advis'd; thou know'st not what it is With javelin's point a churlish swine to gore, Whose tushes never sheath'd he whetteth still, Like to a mortal butcher, bent to kill. 'On his bow-back he hath a battle set Of bristly pikes, that ever threat his foes; His eyes like glow-worms shine when he doth fret; His snout digs sepulchres where'er he goes; Being mov'd, he strikes whate'er is in his way, And whom he strikes his crooked tushes slay. 'His brawny sides, with hairy bristles arm'd, Are better proof than thy spear's point can enter; His short thick neck cannot be easily harm'd; Being ireful, on the lion he will venture: The thorny brambles and embracing bushes, As fearful of him, part, through whom he rushes. 'Alas! he nought esteems that face of thine, To which Love's eyes pay tributary gazes; Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips, and crystal eyne, Whose full perfection all the world amazes; But having thee at vantage, wondrous dread! Would root these beauties as he roots the mead. 'O! let him keep his loathsome cabin still; Beauty hath nought to do with such foul fiends: Come not within his danger by thy will; They that thrive well take counsel of their friends. When thou didst name the boar, not to dissemble, I fear'd thy fortune, and my joints did tremble. 'Didst thou not mark my face? was it not white? Saw'st thou not signs of fear lurk in mine eye? Grew I not faint? And fell I not downright? Within my bosom, whereon thou dost lie, My boding heart pants, beats, and takes no rest, But, like an earthquake, shakes thee on my breast. 'For where Love reigns, disturbing Jealousy Doth call himself Affection's sentinel; Gives false alarms, suggesteth mutiny, And in a peaceful hour doth cry Kill, kill! Distempering gentle Love in his desire, As air and water do abate the fire. 'This sour informer, this bate-breeding spy, This canker that eats up Love's tender spring, This carry-tale, dissentious Jealousy, That sometime true news, sometime false doth bring, Knocks at my heart, and whispers in mine ear That if I love thee, I thy death should fear: 'And more than so, presenteth to mine eye The picture of an angry-chafing boar, Under whose sharp fangs on his back doth lie An image like thyself, all stain'd with gore; Whose blood upon the fresh flowers being shed Doth make them droop with grief and hang the head. 'What should I do, seeing thee so indeed, That tremble at the imagination? The thought of it doth make my faint heart bleed, And fear doth teach it divination: I prophesy thy death, my living sorrow, If thou encounter with the boar to-morrow. 'But if thou needs wilt hunt, be rul'd by me; Uncouple at the timorous flying hare, Or at the fox which lives by subtilty, Or at the roe which no encounter dare: Pursue these fearful creatures o'er the downs, And on thy well-breath'd horse keep with thy hound. 'And when thou hast on foot the purblind hare, Mark the poor wretch, to overshoot his troubles How he outruns the winds, and with what care He cranks and crosses with a thousand doubles: The many musits through the which he goes Are like a labyrinth to amaze his foes. 'Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep, To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell, And sometime where earth-delving conies keep, To stop the loud pursuers in their yell, And sometime sorteth with a herd of deer; Danger deviseth shifts, wit waits on fear: 'For there his smell with others being mingled, The hot scent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt, Ceasing their clamorous cry till they have singled With much ado the cold fault cleanly out; Then do they spend their mouths: Echo replies, As if another chase were in the skies. 'By this, poor Wat, far off upon a hill, Stands on his hinder legs with listening ear, To hearken if his foes pursue him still: Anon their loud alarums he doth hear; And now his grief may be compared well To one sore sick that hears the passing bell. 'Then shalt thou see the dew-bedabbled wretch Turn, and return, indenting with the way; Each envious briar his weary legs doth scratch, Each shadow makes him stop, each murmur stay: For misery is trodden on by many, And being low never reliev'd by any. 'Lie quietly, and hear a little more; Nay, do not struggle, for thou shalt not rise: To make thee hate the hunting of the boar, Unlike myself thou hear'st me moralize, Applying this to that, and so to so; For love can comment upon every woe. 'Where did I leave?' 'No matter where,' quoth he 'Leave me, and then the story aptly ends: The night is spent,' 'Why, what of that?' quoth she. 'I am,' quoth he, 'expected of my friends; And now 'tis dark, and going I shall fall.' But if thou fall, O! then imagine this, The earth, in love with thee, thy footing trips, And all is but to rob thee of a kiss. Rich preys make true men thieves; so do thy lips Make modest Dian cloudy and forlorn, Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn. 'Now of this dark night I perceive the reason: Cynthia for shame obscures her silver shine Till forging Nature be condemn'd of treason, For stealing moulds from heaven that were divine; Wherein she fram'd thee in high heaven's despite, To shame the sun by day and her by night. 'And therefore hath she brib'd the Destinies, To cross the curious workmanship of nature To mingle beauty with infirmities, And pure perfection with impure defeature; Making it subject to the tyranny Of mad mischances and much misery; 'As burning fevers, agues pale and faint, Life-poisoning pestilence and frenzies wood, The marrow-eating sickness, whose attains Disorder breeds by heating of the blood; Surfeits, imposthumes, grief, and damn'd despair, Swear nature's death for framing thee so fair. 'And not the least of all these maladies But in one minute's fight brings beauty under: Both favour, savour hue, and qualities, Whereat the impartial gazer late did wonder, Are on the sudden wasted, thaw'd and done, As mountain-snow melts with the mid-day sun. 'Therefore, despite of fruitless chastity, Love-lacking vestals and self-loving nuns, That on the earth would breed a scarcity And barren dearth of daughters and of sons, Be prodigal: the lamp that burns by night Dries up his oil to lend the world his light. 'What is thy body but a swallowing grave, Seeming to bury that posterity Which by the rights of time thou needs must have, If thou destroy them not in dark obscurity? If so, the world will hold thee in disdain, Sith in thy pride so fair a hope is slain. 'So in thyself thyself art made away; A mischief worse than civil home-bred strife, Or theirs whose desperate hands themselves do slay, Or butcher-sire that reeves his son of life. Foul-cankering rust the hidden treasure frets, But gold that's put to use more gold begets.' 'Nay then,' quoth Adon, 'you will fall again Into your idle over-handled theme; The kiss I gave you is bestow'd in vain, And all in vain you strive against the stream; For by this black-fac'd night, desire's foul nurse, Your treatise makes me like you worse and worse. 'If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues, And every tongue more moving than your own, Bewitching like the wanton mermaid's songs, Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown; For know, my heart stands armed in mine ear, And will not let a false sound enter there; 'Lest the deceiving harmony should run Into the quiet closure of my breast; And then my little heart were quite undone, In his bedchamber to be barr'd of rest. No, lady, no; my heart longs not to groan, But soundly sleeps, while now it sleeps alone. 'What have you urg'd that I cannot reprove? The path is smooth that leadeth on to danger; I hate not love, but your device in love That lends embracements unto every stranger. You do it for increase: O strange excuse! When reason is the bawd to lust's abuse. 'Call it not, love, for Love to heaven is fled, Since sweating Lust on earth usurp'd his name; Under whose simple semblance he hath fed Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame; Which the hot tyrant stains and soon bereaves, As caterpillars do the tender leaves. 'Love comforteth like sunshine after rain, But Lust's effect is tempest after sun; Love's gentle spring doth always fresh remain, Lust's winter comes ere summer half be done. Love surfeits not, Lust like a glutton dies; Love is all truth, Lust full of forged lies. 'More I could tell, but more I dare not say; The text is old, the orator too green. Therefore, in sadness, now I will away; My face is full of shame, my heart of teen: Mine ears, that to your wanton talk attended Do burn themselves for having so offended.' With this he breaketh from the sweet embrace Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast, And homeward through the dark laund runs apace; Leaves Love upon her back deeply distress'd. Look, how a bright star shooteth from the sky So glides he in the night from Venus' eye; Which after him she darts, as one on shore Gazing upon a late-embarked friend, Till the wild waves will have him seen no more, Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend: So did the merciless and pitchy night Fold in the object that did feed her sight. Whereat amaz'd, as one that unaware Or 'stonish'd as night-wanderers often are, Their light blown out in some mistrustful wood; Even so confounded in the dark she lay, Having lost the fair discovery of her way. And now she beats her heart, whereat it groans, That all the neighbour caves, as seeming troubled, Make verbal repetition of her moans; Passion on passion deeply is redoubled: 'Ay me!' she cries, and twenty times, 'Woe, woe!' And twenty echoes twenty times cry so. She marking them, begins a wailing note, And sings extemporally a woeful ditty; How love makes young men thrall and old men dote; How love is wise in folly foolish-witty: Her heavy anthem still concludes in woe, And still the choir of echoes answer so. Her song was tedious, and outwore the night, For lovers' hours are long, though seeming short: If pleas'd themselves, others, they think, delight In such like circumstance, with such like sport: Their copious stories, oftentimes begun, End without audience, and are never done. For who hath she to spend the night withal, But idle sounds resembling parasites; Like shrill-tongu'd tapsters answering every call, Soothing the humour of fantastic wits? She says, ''Tis so:' they answer all, ''Tis so;' And would say after her, if she said 'No'. Lo! here the gentle lark, weary of rest, From his moist cabinet mounts up on high, And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast The sun ariseth in his majesty; Who doth the world so gloriously behold, That cedar-tops and hills seem burnish'd gold. Venus salutes him with this fair good morrow: 'O thou clear god, and patron of all light, From whom each lamp and shining star doth borrow The beauteous influence that makes him bright, There lives a son that suck'd an earthly mother, May lend thee light, as thou dost lend to other' This said, she hasteth to a myrtle grove, Musing the morning is so much o'erworn, And yet she hears no tidings of her love; She hearkens for his hounds and for his horn: Anon she hears them chant it lustily, And all in haste she coasteth to the cry. And as she runs, the bushes in the way Some catch her by the neck, some kiss her face, Some twine about her thigh to make her stay: She wildly breaketh from their strict embrace, Like a milch doe, whose swelling dugs do ache, Hasting to feed her fawn hid in some brake. By this she hears the hounds are at a bay; Whereat she starts, like one that spies an adder Wreath'd up in fatal folds just in his way, The fear whereof doth make him shake and shudder; Even so the timorous yelping of the hounds Appals her senses, and her spirit confounds. For now she knows it is no gentle chase, But the blunt boar, rough bear, or lion proud, Because the cry remaineth in one place, Wilere fearfully the dogs exclaim aloud: Finding their enemy to be so curst, They all strain courtesy who shall cope him first. This dismal cry rings sadly in her ear, Througll which it enters to surprise her heart; Who, overcome by doubt and bloodless fear, With cold-pale weakness numbs each feeling part; Like soldiers, when their captain once doth yield, They basely fly and dare not stay the field. Thus stands she in a trembling ecstasy, Till, cheering up her senses sore dismay'd, She tells them 'tis a causeless fantasy, And childish error, that they are afraid; Bids them leave quaking, bids them fear no more: And with that word she spied the hunted boar; Whose frothy mouth bepainted all with red, Like milk and blood being mingled both together, A second fear through all her sinews spread, Which madly hurries her she knows not whither: This way she runs, and now she will no further, But back retires to rate the boar for murther. A thousand spleens bear her a thousand ways, She treads the path that she untreads again; Her more than haste is mated with delays, Like the proceedings of a drunken brain, Full of respects, yet nought at all respecting, In hand with all things, nought at all effecting. Here kennel'd in a brake she finds a hound, And asks the weary caitiff for his master, And there another licking of his wound, Gainst venom'd sores the only sovereign plaster; And here she meets another sadly scowling, To whom she speaks, and he replies with howling. When he hath ceas'd his ill-resounding noise, Another flap-mouth'd mourner, black and grim, Against the welkin volleys out his voice; Another and another answer him, Clapping their proud tails to the ground below, Shaking their scratch'd ears, bleeding as they go. Look, how the world's poor people are amaz'd At apparitions, signs, and prodigies, Whereon with fearful eyes they long have gaz'd, Infusing them with dreadful prophecies; So she at these sad sighs draws up her breath, And, sighing it again, exclaims on Death. 'Hard-favour'd tyrant, ugly, meagre, lean, Hateful divorce of love,' thus chides she Death, 'Grim-grinning ghost, earth's worm, what dost thou mean To stifle beauty and to steal his breath, Who when he liv'd, his breath and beauty set Gloss on the rose, smell to the violet? 'If he be dead, O no! it cannot be, Seeing his beauty, thou shouldst strike at it; O yes! it may; thou hast no eyes to see, But hatefully at random dost thou hit. Thy mark is feeble age, but thy false dart Mistakes that aim and cleaves an infant's heart. 'Hadst thou but bid beware, then he had spoke, And, hearing him, thy power had lost his power. The Destinies will curse thee for this stroke; They bid thee crop a weed, thou pluck'st a flower. Love's golden arrow at him shoull have fled, And not Death's ebon dart, to strike him dead. 'Dost thou drink tears, that thou provok'st such weeping? What may a heavy groan advantage thee? Why hast thou cast into eternal sleeping Those eyes that taught all other eyes to see? Now Nature cares not for thy mortal vigour Since her best work is ruin'd with thy rigour.' Here overcome, as one full of despair, She vail'd her eyelids, who, like sluices, stopp'd The crystal tide that from her two cheeks fair In the sweet channel of her bosom dropp'd But through the flood-gates breaks the silver rain, And with his strong course opens them again. O! how her eyes and tears did lend and borrow; Her eyes seen in the tears, tears in her eye; Both crystals, where they view'd each other's sorrow, Sorrow that friendly sighs sought still to dry; But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain, Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make them wet again. Variable passions throng her constant woe, As striving who should best become her grief; All entertain'd, each passion labours so, That every present sorrow seemeth chief, But none is best; then join they all together, Like many clouds consulting for foul weather. By this, far off she hears some huntsman holloa; A nurse's song no'er pleas'd her babe so well: The dire imagination she did follow This sound of hope doth labour to expel; For now reviving joy bids her rejoice, And flatters her it is Adonis' voice. Whereat her tears began to turn their tide, Being prison'd in her eye, like pearls in glass; Yet sometimes falls an orient drop beside, Which her cheek melts, as scorning it should pass Who is but drunken when she seemeth drown'd. O hard-believing love! how strange it seems Not to believe, and yet too credulous; Thy weal and woe are both of them extremes; Despair and hope make thee ridiculous: The one doth flatter thee in thoughts unlikely, In likely thoughts the other kills thee quickly. Now she unweaves the web that she hath wrought, Adonis lives, and Death is not to blame; It was not she that call'd him all to naught, Now she adds honours to his hateful name; She clepes him king of graves, and grave for kings, Imperious supreme of all mortal things. 'No, no,' quoth she, 'sweet Death, I did but jest; Yet pardon me, I felt a kind of fear Whenas I met the boar, that bloody beast, Which knows no pity, but is still severe; Then, gentle shadow, truth I must confess I rail'd on thee, fearing my love's decease. 'Tis not my fault: the boar provok'd my tongue; Be wreak'd on him, invisible commander; 'Tis he, foul creature, that hath done thee wrong; I did but act, he 's author of my slander: Grief hath two tongues: and never woman yet, Could rule them both without ten women's wit.' Thus hoping that Adonis is alive, Her rash suspect sile doth extenuate; And that his beauty may the better thrive, With Death she humbly doth insinuate; Tells him of trophies, statues, tombs; and stories His victories, his triumphs, and his glories. 'O Jove!' quoth she, 'how much a fool was I, To be of such a weak and silly mind To wail his death who lives and must not die Till mutual overthrow of mortal kind; For he being dead, with him is beauty slain, And, beauty dead, black chaos comes again. 'Fie, fie, fond love! thou art so full of fear As one with treasure laden, hemm'd with thieves Trifles, unwitnessed with eye or ear, Thy coward heart with false bethinking grieves.' Even at this word she hears a merry horn Whereat she leaps that was but late forlorn. As falcon to the lure, away she flies; The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light; And in her haste unfortunately spies The foul boar's conquest on her fair delight; Which seen, her eyes, as murder'd with the view, Like stars asham'd of day, themselves withdrew: Or, as the snail, whose tender horns being hit, Shrinks backwards in his shelly cave with pain, And there, all smother'd up, in shade doth sit, Long after fearing to creep forth again; So, at his bloody view, her eyes are fled Into the deep dark cabills of her head; Where they resign their office and their light To the disposing of her troubled brain; Who bids them still consort with ugly night, And never wound the heart with looks again; Who, like a king perplexed in his throne, By their suggestion gives a deadly groan, Whereat each tributary subject quakes; As when the wind, imprison'd in the ground, Struggling for passage, earth's foundation shakes, Which with cold terror doth men's minds confound. This mutiny each part doth so surprise That from their dark beds once more leap her eyes; And, being open'd, threw unwilling light Upon the wide wound that the boar had trench'd In his soft flank; whose wonted lily white With purple tears, that his wound wept, was drench'd: No flower was nigh, no grass, herb, leaf, or weed But stole his blood and seem'd with him to bleed. This solemn sympathy poor Venus noteth, Over one shoulder doth she hang her head, She thinks he could not die, he is not dead: Her voice is stopp'd, her joints forget to bow, Her eyes are mad that they have wept till now. Upon his hurt she looks so steadfastly, That her sight dazzling makes the wound seem three; And then she reprehends her mangling eye, That makes more gashes where no breach should be: His face seems twain, each several limb is doubled; For oft the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled. 'My tongue cannot express my grief for one, And yet,' quoth she, 'behold two Adons dead! My sighs are blown away, my salt tears gone, Mine eyes are turn'd to fire, my heart to lead: Heavy heart's lead, melt at mine eyes' red fire! So shall I die by drops of hot desire. 'Alas! poor world, what treasure hast thou lost! What face remains alive that's worth the viewing? Whose tongue is music now? what canst thou boast Of things long since, or anything ensuing? The flowers are sweet, their colours fresh and trim; But true-sweet beauty liv'd and died with him. 'Bonnet nor veil henceforth no creature wear! Nor sun nor wind will ever strive to kiss you: Having no fair to lose, you need not fear; The sun doth scorn you, and the wind doth hiss you: But when Adonis liv'd, sun and sharp air Lurk'd like two thieves, to rob him of his fair: 'And therefore would he put his bonnet on, Under whose brim the gaudy sun would peep; The wind would blow it off, and, being gone, Play with his locks: then would Adonis weep; And straight, in pity of his tender years, They both would strive who first should dry his tears. 'To see his face the lion walk'd along Behind some hedge, because he would not fear him; To recreate himself when he hath sung, The tiger would be tame and gently hear him; If he had spoke, the wolf would leave his prey, And never fright the silly lamb that day. 'When he beheld his shadow in the brook, The fishes spread on it their golden gills; When he was by, the birds such pleasure took, That some would sing, some other in their bills Would bring him mulberries and ripe-red cherries He fed them with his sight, they him with berries. 'But this foul, grim, and urchin-spouted boar, Whose downward eye still looketh for a grave, Ne'er saw the beauteous livery that he wore; Witness the entertainment that he gave: If he did see his face, why then I know He thought to kiss him, and hath killed him so. ''Tis true, 'tis true; thus was Adonis slain: He ran upon the boar with his sharp spear, Who did not whet his teeth at him again, But by a kiss thought to persuade him there; And nuzzling in his flank, the loving swine Sheath'd unaware the tusk in his soft groin. 'Had I been tooth'd like him, I must confess, With kissing him I should have kill'd him first; But he is dead, and never did he bless My youth with his; the more am I accurst.' With this she falleth in the place she stood, And stains her face with his congealed blood. Sho looks upon his lips, and they are pale; She takes him by the hand, and that is cold; She whispers in his ears a heavy tale, As if they heard the woeful words she told; She lifts the coffer-lids that close his eyes, Where, lo! two lamps, burnt out, in darkness lies; Two glasses where herself herself beheld A thousand times, and now no more reflect; Their virtue lost, wherein they late excell'd, And every beauty robb'd of his effect: 'Wonder of time,' quoth she, 'this is my spite, That, you being dead, the day should yet be light. 'Since thou art dead, lo! here I prophesy, Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend: It shall be waited on with jealousy, Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end; Ne'er settled equally, but high or low; That all love's pleasure shall not match his woe. 'It shall be fickle, false, and full of fraud, Bud and be blasted in a breathing-while; The bottom poison, and the top o'erstraw'd With sweets that shall the truest sight beguile: The strongest body shall it make most weak, 'It shall be sparing and too full of riot, Teaching decrepit age to tread the measures; The staring ruffian shall it keep in quiet, Pluck down the rich, enrich the poor with treasures; It shall be raging mad, and silly mild, Make the young old, the old become a child. 'It shall suspect where is no cause of fear; It shall not fear where it should most mistrust; It shall be merciful, and too severe, And most deceiving when it seems most just; Perverse it shall be, where it shows most toward, Put fear to velour, courage to the coward. 'It shall be cause of war and dire events, And set dissension 'twixt the son and sire; Subject and servile to all discontents, As dry combustious matter is to fire: Sith in his prime Death doth my love destroy, By this, the boy that by her side lay kill'd Was melted like a vapour from her sight, And in his blood that on the ground lay spill'd, A purple flower sprung up, chequer'd with white; Resembling well his pale cheeks, and the blood Which in round drops upon their whiteness stood. She bows her head, the new-sprung flower to smell, Comparing it to her Adonis' breath; And says within her bosom it shall dwell, Since he himself is reft from her by death: She drops the stalk, and in the breach appears Green dropping sap, which she compares to tears. 'Poor flower,' quoth she, 'this was thy father's guise, Sweet issue of a more sweet-smelling sire, For every little grief to wet his eyes: To grow unto himself was his desire, And so 'tis shine; but know, it is as good To wither in my breast as in his blood. 'Here was thy father's bed, here in my breast; Thou art the next of blood, and 'tis thy right: Lo! in this hollow cradle take thy rest, My throbbing heart shall rock thee day and night: There shall not be one minute in an hour Wherein I will not kiss my sweet love's flower.' Thus weary of the world, away she hies, And yokes her silver doves; by whose swift aid Their mistress, mounted, through the empty skies In her light chariot quickly is convey'd; Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen Means to immure herself and not be seen. <|endofpoem|> When beauty, youth, and all sweets leave her, Love may return, but lovers never! Love in her sunny eyes does basking play, Love walks the pleasant mazes of her hair: the moulds of form provided. He does this with a lively facility, Scatters his loose notes in the waste of air My once-dear Love! hapless, that I no more Must call thee so. The rich affection's store That fed our hopes, lies now exhaust and spent, Like sums of treasure unto bankrupts lent: We that did nothing study but the way To love each other, with which thoughts the day Rose with delight to us, and with them set, Must learn the hateful art, how to forget! Fold back our arms, take home our fruitless loves, That must new fortunes try, like turtle doves Dislodged from their haunts. We must in tears Unwind a love knit up in many years. In this one kiss I here surrender thee Back to thyself: so thou again art free: take eight lines by some old unknown Northern singer: When I think on the happy days I spent wi' you, my dearie, And now what lands between us lie, How can I be but eerie! How slow ye move, ye heavy hours, As ye were wae and weary! It was na sae ye glinted by When I was wi' my dearie: I sing of brooks, of blossoms, birds, and bowers, Of April, May, of June, and July-flowers; I sing of May-poles, hock-carts, wassails, wakes, Of bride-grooms, brides, and of their bridal-cakes. I write of Youth, of Love; and have access By these, to sing of cleanly wantonness; I sing of dews, of rains, and, piece by piece, Of balm, of oil, of spice, and ambergris. I sing of times trans-shifting; and I write How roses first came red, and lilies white. I write of groves, of twilights, and I sing The court of Mab, and of the Fairy King. I write of Hell; I sing, and ever shall Of Heaven, and hope to have it after all. Whither, mad maiden, wilt thou roam? Far safer 'twere to stay at home; Where thou mayst sit, and piping, please The poor and private cottages. Since cotes and hamlets best agree With this thy meaner minstrelsy. There with the reed thou mayst express The shepherd's fleecy happiness; And with thy Eclogues intermix: Some smooth and harmless Bucolics. There, on a hillock, thou mayst sing Unto a handsome shepherdling; Or to a girl, that keeps the neat, With breath more sweet than violet. There, there, perhaps such lines as these May take the simple villages; But for the court, the country wit Is despicable unto it. Stay then at home, and do not go Or fly abroad to seek for woe; Contempts in courts and cities dwell No critic haunts the poor man's cell, Where thou mayst hear thine own lines read By no one tongue there censured. That man's unwise will search for ill, And may prevent it, sitting still. In sober mornings, do not thou rehearse The holy incantation of a verse; But when that men have both well drunk, and fed, Let my enchantments then be sung or read. When laurel spirts i' th' fire, and when the hearth Smiles to itself, and gilds the roof with mirth; When up the Thyrse is raised, and when the sound Of sacred orgies, flies A round, A round; When the rose reigns, and locks with ointments shine, Let rigid Cato read these lines of mine. Make haste away, and let one be A friendly patron unto thee; Lest, rapt from hence, I see thee lie Torn for the use of pastery; Or see thy injured leaves serve well To make loose gowns for mackarel; Or see the grocers, in a trice, Make hoods of thee to serve out spice. Take mine advice, and go not near Those faces, sour as vinegar; For these, and nobler numbers, can Ne'er please the supercilious man. Be bold, my Book, nor be abash'd, or fear The cutting thumb-nail, or the brow severe; But by the Muses swear, all here is good, If but well read, or ill read, understood. My Muse in meads has spent her many hours Sitting, and sorting several sorts of flowers, To make for others garlands; and to set On many a head here, many a coronet. But amongst all encircled here, not one Gave her a day of coronation; Till you, sweet mistress, came and interwove A laurel for her, ever young as Love. You first of all crown'd her; she must, of due, Render for that, a crown of life to you. What will ye, my poor orphans, do, When I must leave the world and you; Who'll give ye then a sheltering shed, Or credit ye, when I am dead? Who'll let ye by their fire sit, Although ye have a stock of wit, Already coin'd to pay for it? I cannot tell: unless there be Some race of old humanity Left, of the large heart and long hand, Alive, as noble Westmorland; Or gallant Newark; which brave two May fost'ring fathers be to you. If not, expect to be no less Ill used, than babes left fatherless. 'Tis not ev'ry day that I Fitted am to prophesy: No, but when the spirit fills The fantastic pannicles, Full of fire, then I write As the Godhead doth indite. Thus enraged, my lines are hurl'd, Like the Sibyl's, through the world: Look how next the holy fire Either slakes, or doth retire; So the fancy cools: till when That brave spirit comes again. When I a verse shall make, Know I have pray'd thee, For old religion's sake, Make the way smooth for me, Honouring thee on my knee Candles I'll give to thee, And a new altar; And thou, Saint Ben, shalt be Writ in my psalter. Julia, if I chance to die Ere I print my poetry, I most humbly thee desire To commit it to the fire: Better 'twere my book were dead, Than to live not perfected. Go thou forth, my book, though late, Yet be timely fortunate. It may chance good luck may send Thee a kinsman or a friend, That may harbour thee, when I With my fates neglected lie. If thou know'st not where to dwell, See, the fire's by. Farewell! Only a little more I have to write: Then I'll give o'er, And bid the world good-night. 'Tis but a flying minute, That I must stay, Or linger in it: And then I must away. O Time, that cut'st down all, And scarce leav'st here Of any men that were; How many lie forgot In vaults beneath, And piece-meal rot Without a fame in death? Behold this living stone I rear for me, Ne'er to be thrown Down, envious Time, by thee. Pillars let some set up If so they please; Here is my hope, If hap it must, that I must see thee lie Absyrtus-like, all torn confusedly; With solemn tears, and with much grief of heart, I'll recollect thee, weeping, part by part; And having wash'd thee, close thee in a chest With spice; that done, I'll leave thee to thy rest. Thou shalt not all die; for while Love's fire shines Upon his altar, men shall read thy lines; And learn'd musicians shall, to honour Herrick's Fame, and his name, both set and sing his lyrics. To his book's end this last line he'd have placed: Jocund his Muse was, but his Life was chaste. Sweet country life, to such unknown, Whose lives are others', not their own! But serving courts and cities, be Less happy, less enjoying thee. Thou never plough'st the ocean's foam To seek and bring rough pepper home: Nor to the Eastern Ind dost rove To bring from thence the scorched clove: Nor, with the loss of thy loved rest, Bring'st home the ingot from the West. No, thy ambition's master-piece Flies no thought higher than a fleece: Or how to pay thy hinds, and clear All scores: and so to end the year: But walk'st about thine own dear bounds, Not envying others' larger grounds: For well thou know'st, 'tis not th' extent Of land makes life, but sweet content. When now the cock the ploughman's horn Calls forth the lily-wristed morn; Then to thy corn-fields thou dost go, Which though well soil'd, yet thou dost know That the best compost for the lands Is the wise master's feet, and hands. There at the plough thou find'st thy team, With a hind whistling there to them: And cheer'st them up, by singing how The kingdom's portion is the plough. This done, then to th' enamell'd meads Thou go'st; and as thy foot there treads, Thou seest a present God-like power Imprinted in each herb and flower: And smell'st the breath of great-eyed kine, Sweet as the blossoms of the vine. Here thou behold'st thy large sleek neat Unto the dew-laps up in meat: And, as thou look'st, the wanton steer, The heifer, cow, and ox draw near, To make a pleasing pastime there. These seen, thou go'st to view thy flocks Of sheep, safe from the wolf and fox, And find'st their bellies there as full Of short sweet grass, as backs with wool: And leav'st them, as they feed and fill, A shepherd piping on a hill. For sports, for pageantry, and plays, Thou hast thy eves, and holydays: On which the young men and maids meet, To exercise their dancing feet: Tripping the comely country Round, With daffadils and daisies crown'd. Thy wakes, thy quintels, here thou hast, Thy May-poles too with garlands graced; Thy Morris-dance; thy Whitsun-ale; Thy shearing-feast, which never fail. Thy harvest home; thy wassail bowl, That's toss'd up after Fox i' th' hole: Thy mummeries; thy Twelve-tide kings And queens; thy Christmas revellings: Thy nut-brown mirth, thy russet wit, And no man pays too dear for it. To these, thou hast thy times to go And trace the hare i' th' treacherous snow: Thy witty wiles to draw, and get The lark into the trammel net: Thou hast thy cockrood, and thy glade To take the precious pheasant made: Thy lime-twigs, snares, and pit-falls then To catch the pilfering birds, not men. O happy life! if that their good The husbandmen but understood! Who all the day themselves do please, And younglings, with such sports as these: And lying down, have nought t' affright Sweet Sleep, that makes more short the night. Live, live with me, and thou shalt see The pleasures I'll prepare for thee: What sweets the country can afford Shall bless thy bed, and bless thy board. The soft sweet moss shall be thy bed, With crawling woodbine over-spread: By which the silver-shedding streams Shall gently melt thee into dreams. Thy clothing next, shall be a gown Made of the fleeces' purest down. The tongues of kids shall be thy meat; Their milk thy drink; and thou shalt eat The paste of filberts for thy bread With cream of cowslips buttered: Thy feasting-table shall be hills With daisies spread, and daffadils; Where thou shalt sit, and Red-breast by, For meat, shall give thee melody. I'll give thee chains and carcanets Of primroses and violets. A bag and bottle thou shalt have, That richly wrought, and this as brave; So that as either shall express The wearer's no mean shepherdess. At shearing-times, and yearly wakes, When Themilis his pastime makes, There thou shalt be; and be the wit, Nay more, the feast, and grace of it. On holydays, when virgins meet To dance the heys with nimble feet, Thou shalt come forth, and then appear The Queen of Roses for that year. And having danced 'bove all the best Carry the garland from the rest, In wicker-baskets maids shall bring To thee, my dearest shepherdling, The blushing apple, bashful pear, And shame-faced plum, all simp'ring there. Walk in the groves, and thou shalt find The name of Phillis in the rind Of every straight and smooth-skin tree; Where kissing that, I'll twice kiss thee. To thee a sheep-hook I will send, Be-prank'd with ribbands, to this end, This, this alluring hook might be Less for to catch a sheep, than me. Thou shalt have possets, wassails fine, Not made of ale, but spiced wine; To make thy maids and self free mirth, All sitting near the glitt'ring hearth. Thou shalt have ribbands, roses, rings, Gloves, garters, stockings, shoes, and strings Of winning colours, that shall move Others to lust, but me to love. These, nay, and more, thine own shall be, If thou wilt love, and live with me. Give way, give way, ye gates, and win An easy blessing to your bin And basket, by our entering in. May both with manchet stand replete; Your larders, too, so hung with meat, That though a thousand, thousand eat, Yet, ere twelve moons shall whirl about Their silv'ry spheres, there's none may doubt But more's sent in than was served out. Next, may your dairies prosper so, As that your pans no ebb may know; But if they do, the more to flow, Like to a solemn sober stream, Bank'd all with lilies, and the cream Of sweetest cowslips filling them. Then may your plants be press'd with fruit, Nor bee or hive you have be mute, But sweetly sounding like a lute. Last, may your harrows, shares, and ploughs, Your stacks, your stocks, your sweetest mows, All prosper by your virgin-vows. Alas! we bless, but see none here, That brings us either ale or beer; In a dry-house all things are near. Let's leave a longer time to wait, Where rust and cobwebs bind the gate; And all live here with needy fate; Where chimneys do for ever weep For want of warmth, and stomachs keep With noise the servants' eyes from sleep. It is in vain to sing, or stay Our free feet here, but we'll away: Yet to the Lares this we'll say: 'The time will come when you'll be sad, 'And reckon this for fortune bad, 'T'ave lost the good ye might have had.' If ye will with Mab find grace, Set each platter in his place; Rake the fire up, and get Water in, ere sun be set. Wash your pails and cleanse your dairies, Sweep your house; Who doth not so, Mab will pinch her by the toe. Down with the rosemary, and so Down with the bays and misletoe; Down with the holly, ivy, all Wherewith ye dress'd the Christmas hall; That so the superstitious find No one least branch there left behind; For look, how many leaves there be Neglected there, maids, trust to me, So many goblins you shall see. Down with the rosemary and bays, Down with the misletoe; Instead of holly, now up-raise The greener box, for show. The holly hitherto did sway; Let box now domineer, Until the dancing Easter-day, Or Easter's eve appear. Then youthful box, which now hath grace Your houses to renew, Grown old, surrender must his place Unto the crisped yew. When yew is out, then birch comes in, And many flowers beside, Both of a fresh and fragrant kin, To honour Whitsuntide. Green rushes then, and sweetest bents, With cooler oaken boughs, Come in for comely ornaments, To re-adorn the house. Thus times do shift; each thing his turn does hold; New things succeed, as former things grow old. Kindle the Christmas brand, and then Till sunset let it burn; Which quench'd, then lay it up again, Till Christmas next return. Part must be kept, wherewith to teend The Christmas log next year; And where 'tis safely kept, the fiend Can do no mischief there. Fled are the frosts, and now the fields appear Reclothed in fresh and verdant diaper; Thaw'd are the snows; and now the lusty Spring Gives to each mead a neat enamelling; The palms put forth their gems, and every tree Now swaggers in her leafy gallantry. The while the Daulian minstrel sweetly sings With warbling notes her Terean sufferings. What gentle winds perspire! as if here Never had been the northern plunderer To strip the trees and fields, to their distress, Leaving them to a pitied nakedness. And look how when a frantic storm doth tear A stubborn oak or holm, long growing there, But lull'd to calmness, then succeeds a breeze That scarcely stirs the nodding leaves of trees; So when this war, which tempest-like doth spoil Our salt, our corn, our honey, wine, and oil, Falls to a temper, and doth mildly cast His inconsiderate frenzy off, at last, The gentle dove may, when these turmoils cease, Bring in her bill, once more, the branch of Peace. Come, sit we under yonder tree, Where merry as the maids we'll be; And as on primroses we sit, We'll venture, if we can, at wit; If not, at draw-gloves we will play, So spend some minutes of the day; Or else spin out the thread of sands, Playing at questions and commands: Or tell what strange tricks Love can do, By quickly making one of two. Thus we will sit and talk, but tell No cruel truths of Philomel, Or Phillis, whom hard fate forced on To kill herself for Demophon; But fables we'll relate; how Jove Put on all shapes to get a Love; As now a satyr, then a swan, A bull but then, and now a man. Next, we will act how young men woo, And sigh and kiss as lovers do; And talk of brides; and who shall make That wedding-smock, this bridal-cake, That dress, this sprig, that leaf, this vine, That smooth and silken columbine. This done, we'll draw lots who shall buy And gild the bays and rosemary; What posies for our wedding rings; What gloves we'll give, and ribbonings; And smiling at our selves, decree Who then the joining priest shall be; What short sweet prayers shall be said, And how the posset shall be made With cream of lilies, not of kine, And maiden's-blush for spiced wine. Thus having talk'd, we'll next commend A kiss to each, and so we'll end. Get up, get up for shame! the blooming morn Upon her wings presents the god unshorn. See how Aurora throws her fair Fresh-quilted colours through the air: Get up, sweet-slug-a-bed, and see The dew bespangling herb and tree. Each flower has wept, and bow'd toward the east, Above an hour since; yet you not drest, Nay! not so much as out of bed? When all the birds have matins said, And sung their thankful hymns: 'tis sin, Nay, profanation, to keep in, Whenas a thousand virgins on this day, Spring, sooner than the lark, to fetch in May. Rise; and put on your foliage, and be seen To come forth, like the Spring-time, fresh and green, And sweet as Flora. Take no care Fear not; the leaves will strew Gems in abundance upon you: Besides, the childhood of the day has kept, Against you come, some orient pearls unwept: Come, and receive them while the light Hangs on the dew-locks of the night: And Titan on the eastern hill Retires himself, or else stands still Till you come forth. Wash, dress, be brief in praying: Few beads are best, when once we go a Maying. Come, my Corinna, come; and coming, mark How each field turns a street; each street a park Made green, and trimm'd with trees: see how Devotion gives each house a bough Or branch: each porch, each door, ere this, An ark, a tabernacle is Made up of white-thorn neatly interwove; As if here were those cooler shades of love. Can such delights be in the street, And open fields, and we not see't? Come, we'll abroad: and let's obey The proclamation made for May: And sin no more, as we have done, by staying; But, my Corinna, come, let's go a Maying. There's not a budding boy, or girl, this day, But is got up, and gone to bring in May. A deal of youth, ere this, is come Back, and with white-thorn laden home. Some have dispatch'd their cakes and cream, Before that we have left to dream: And some have wept, and woo'd, and plighted troth, And chose their priest, ere we can cast off sloth: Many a green-gown has been given; Many a kiss, both odd and even: Many a glance, too, has been sent From out the eye, love's firmament: Many a jest told of the keys betraying This night, and locks pick'd: yet we're not a Maying. Come, let us go, while we are in our prime; And take the harmless folly of the time! We shall grow old apace, and die Before we know our liberty. Our life is short; and our days run As fast away as does the sun: And as a vapour, or a drop of rain Once lost, can ne'er be found again: So when or you or I are made A fable, song, or fleeting shade; All love, all liking, all delight Lies drown'd with us in endless night. Then while time serves, and we are but decaying, Come, my Corinna! come, let's go a Maying. The May-pole is up, Now give me the cup; I'll drink to the garlands around it; But first unto those Whose hands did compose The glory of flowers that crown'd it. A health to my girls, Whose husbands may earls Or lords be, granting my wishes, And when that ye wed To the bridal bed, Then multiply all, like to fishes. Go to feast, as others do: Are the junkets still at wakes; Unto which the tribes resort, Where the business is the sport: Morris-dancers thou shalt see, Marian, too, in pageantry; And a mimic to devise Many grinning properties. Players there will be, and those Base in action as in clothes; Yet with strutting they will please The incurious villages. Near the dying of the day There will be a cudgel-play, Where a coxcomb will be broke, Ere a good word can be spoke: But the anger ends all here, Drench'd in ale, or drown'd in beer. Happy rusticks! best content With the cheapest merriment; And possess no other fear, Than to want the Wake next year. Come, Sons of Summer, by whose toil We are the lords of wine and oil: By whose tough labours, and rough hands, We rip up first, then reap our lands. Crown'd with the ears of corn, now come, And, to the pipe, sing Harvest Home. Come forth, my lord, and see the cart Drest up with all the country art. See, here a maukin, there a sheet, As spotless pure, as it is sweet: The horses, mares, and frisking fillies, Clad, all, in linen white as lilies. The harvest swains and wenches bound For joy, to see the Hock-Cart crown'd. About the cart, hear, how the rout Of rural younglings raise the shout; Pressing before, some coming after, Those with a shout, and these with laughter. Some bless the cart; some kiss the sheaves; Some prank them up with oaken leaves: Some cross the fill-horse; some with great Devotion, stroke the home-borne wheat: While other rustics, less attent To prayers, than to merriment, Run after with their breeches rent. Well, on, brave boys, to your lord's hearth, Glitt'ring with fire; where, for your mirth, Ye shall see first the large and chief Foundation of your feast, fat beef; With upper stories, mutton, veal And bacon, which makes full the meal, With sev'ral dishes standing by, And here, all tempting frumenty. And for to make the merry cheer, If smirking wine be wanting here, There's that which drowns all care, stout beer: Which freely drink to your lord's health Then to the plough, the common-wealth; Next to your flails, your fanes, your vats; Then to the maids with wheaten hats: To the rough sickle, and crookt scythe, Drink, frolic, boys, till all be blythe. Feed, and grow fat; and as ye eat, Be mindful, that the lab'ring neat, As you, may have their fill of meat. And know, besides, ye must revoke The patient ox unto the yoke, And all go back unto the plough And harrow, though they're hang'd up now. And, you must know, your lord's word's true, Feed him ye must, whose food fills you; And that this pleasure is like rain, Not sent ye for to drown your pain, But for to make it spring again. This day, my Julia, thou must make For Mistress Bride the wedding-cake: Knead but the dough, and it will be To paste of almonds turn'd by thee; Or kiss it thou but once or twice, And for the bride-cake there'll be spice. Holy-Rood, come forth and shield Us i' th' city and the field; Safely guard us, now and aye, From the blast that burns by day; And those sounds that us affright In the dead of dampish night; Drive all hurtful fiends us fro, By the time the cocks first crow. From noise of scare-fires rest ye free From murders, Benedicite; From all mischances that may fright Your pleasing slumbers in the night Mercy secure ye all, and keep The goblin from ye, while ye sleep. Past one a clock, and almost two, My masters all, 'Good day to you.' Command the roof, great Genius, and from thence Into this house pour down thy influence, That through each room a golden pipe may run Of living water by thy benizon; Fulfil the larders, and with strength'ning bread Be ever-more these bins replenished. Next, like a bishop consecrate my ground, That lucky fairies here may dance their round; And, after that, lay down some silver pence, The master's charge and care to recompence. Charm then the chambers; make the beds for ease, More than for peevish pining sicknesses; Fix the foundation fast, and let the roof Grow old with time, but yet keep weather-proof. Though clock, To tell how night draws hence, I've none, A cock I have to sing how day draws on: I have A maid, my Prue, by good luck sent, To save That little, Fates me gave or lent. A hen I keep, which, creeking day by day, Tells when She goes her long white egg to lay: A goose I have, which, with a jealous ear, Lets loose Her tongue, to tell what danger's near. A lamb I keep, tame, with my morsels fed, An orphan left him, lately dead: A cat I keep, that plays about my house, With eating many a miching mouse: To these A Trasy I do keep, whereby I please The more my rural privacy: But toys, to give my heart some ease: Where care None is, slight things do lightly please. Good day, Mirtillo. And to you no less; And all fair signs lead on our shepherdess. With all white luck to you. But say, What news Stirs in our sheep-walk? None, save that my ewes, My wethers, lambs, and wanton kids are well, Smooth, fair, and fat; none better I can tell: Or that this day Menalchas keeps a feast For his sheep-shearers. True, these are the least. But dear Amintas, and sweet Amarillis, Rest but a while here by this bank of lilies; And lend a gentle ear to one report The country has. From whence? AMAR. From whence? The Court. Three days before the shutting-in of May, With whitest wool be ever crown'd that day! To all our joy, a sweet-faced child was born, More tender than the childhood of the morn. Pan pipe to him, and bleats of lambs and sheep Let lullaby the pretty prince asleep! And that his birth should be more singular, At noon of day was seen a silver star, Bright as the wise men's torch, which guided them To God's sweet babe, when born at Bethlehem; While golden angels, some have told to me, Sung out his birth with heav'nly minstrelsy. O rare! But is't a trespass, if we three Should wend along his baby-ship to see? Not so, not so. But if it chance to prove At most a fault, 'tis but a fault of love. But, dear Mirtillo, I have heard it told, Those learned men brought incense, myrrh, and gold, From countries far, with store of spices sweet, And laid them down for offerings at his feet. 'Tis true, indeed; and each of us will bring Unto our smiling and our blooming King, A neat, though not so great an offering. A garland for my gift shall be, Of flowers ne'er suck'd by th' thieving bee; And all most sweet, yet all less sweet than he. And I will bear along with you Leaves dropping down the honied dew, With oaten pipes, as sweet, as new. And I a sheep-hook will bestow To have his little King-ship know, As he is Prince, he's Shepherd too. Come, let's away, and quickly let's be drest, And quickly give: the swiftest grace is best. And when before him we have laid our treasures, We'll bless the babe: then back to country pleasures. My dearest Love, since thou wilt go, And leave me here behind thee; For love or pity, let me know The place where I may find thee. In country meadows, pearl'd with dew, And set about with lilies; There, filling maunds with cowslips, you May find your Amarillis. What have the meads to do with thee, Or with thy youthful hours? Live thou at court, where thou mayst be The queen of men, not flowers. Let country wenches make 'em fine With posies, since 'tis fitter For thee with richest gems to shine, And like the stars to glitter. You set too-high a rate upon A shepherdess so homely. Believe it, dearest, there's not one I' th' court that's half so comely. I prithee stay. I must away; Let's kiss first, then we'll sever; And though we bid adieu to day, We shall not part for ever. For a kiss or two, confess, What doth cause this pensiveness, Thou most lovely neat-herdess? Why so lonely on the hill? Why thy pipe by thee so still, That erewhile was heard so shrill? Tell me, do thy kine now fail To fulfil the milking-pail? Say, what is't that thou dost ail? None of these; but out, alas! A mischance is come to pass, And I'll tell thee what it was: See, mine eyes are weeping ripe. Tell, and I'll lay down my pipe. I have lost my lovely steer, That to me was far more dear Than these kine which I milk here; Broad of forehead, large of eye, Party-colour'd like a pye, Smooth in each limb as a die; Clear of hoof, and clear of horn, Sharply pointed as a thorn; With a neck by yoke unworn, From the which hung down by strings, Balls of cowslips, daisy rings, Interplaced with ribbonings; Faultless every way for shape; Not a straw could him escape, Ever gamesome as an ape, But yet harmless as a sheep. Pardon, Lacon, if I weep; Tears will spring where woes are deep. Now, ai me! ai me! Last night Came a mad dog, and did bite, Ay, and kill'd my dear delight. Alack, for grief! But I'll be brief. Hence I must, for time doth call Me, and my sad playmates all, To his evening funeral. Live long, Lacon; so adieu! Mournful maid, farewell to you; Earth afford ye flowers to strew! Bad are the times. And worse than they are we. Troth, bad are both; worse fruit, and ill the tree: The feast of shepherds fail. None crowns the cup Of wassail now, or sets the quintel up: And he, who used to lead the country-round, Youthful Mirtillo, here he comes, grief-drown'd. Let's cheer him up. Behold him weeping-ripe. Ah, Amarillis! farewell mirth and pipe; Since thou art gone, no more I mean to play To these smooth lawns, my mirthful roundelay. Dear Amarillis! Hark! Mark! This earth grew sweet Where, Amarillis, thou didst set thy feet. Poor pitied youth! And here the breath of kine And sheep grew more sweet by that breath of thine. This dock of wool, and this rich lock of hair, This ball of cowslips, these she gave me here. SIL. Words sweet as love itself. Hark! This way she came, and this way too she went; How each thing smells divinely redolent! Like to a field of beans, when newly blown, Or like a meadow being lately mown. A sweet sad passion In dewy mornings, when she came this way, Sweet bents would bow, to give my Love the day; And when at night she folded had her sheep, Daisies would shut, and closing, sigh and weep. Besides Ai me! since she went hence to dwell, The Voice's Daughter ne'er spake syllable. But she is gone. SIL. Mirtillo, tell us whither? Where she and I shall never meet together. Fore-fend it, Pan! and Pales, do thou please To give an end... To what? Such griefs as these. Never, O never! Still I may endure The wound I suffer, never find a cure. Love, for thy sake, will bring her to these hills And dales again. No, I will languish still; And all the while my part shall be to weep; And with my sighs call home my bleating sheep; And in the rind of every comely tree I'll carve thy name, and in that name kiss thee. Set with the sun, thy woes! SIL. The day grows old; And time it is our full-fed flocks to fold. The shades grow great; but greater grows our sorrow: But let's go steep Our eyes in sleep; And meet to weep To-morrow. Thou art to all lost love the best, The only true plant found, Wherewith young men and maids distrest And left of love, are crown'd. When once the lover's rose is dead Or laid aside forlorn, Then willow-garlands, 'bout the head, Bedew'd with tears, are worn. When with neglect, the lover's bane, Poor maids rewarded be, For their love lost their only gain Is but a wreath from thee. And underneath thy cooling shade, When weary of the light, The love-spent youth, and love-sick maid, Come to weep out the night. A way enchaced with glass and beads There is, that to the Chapel leads; Whose structure, for his holy rest, Is here the Halcyon's curious nest; Into the which who looks, shall see Where he of god-heads has such store, As Rome's Pantheon had not more. His house of Rimmon this he calls, Girt with small bones, instead of walls. First in a niche, more black than jet, His idol-cricket there is set; Then in a polish'd oval by There stands his idol-beetle-fly; Next, in an arch, akin to this, His idol-canker seated is. Then in a round, is placed by these His golden god, Cantharides. So that where'er ye look, ye see No capital, no cornice free, Or frieze, from this fine frippery. Now this the Fairies would have known, Theirs is a mixt religion: And some have heard the elves it call Part Pagan, part Papistical. If unto me all tongues were granted, I could not speak the saints here painted. Who 'gainst Mab's state placed here right is. Saint Will o' th' Wisp, of no great bigness, But, alias, call'd here Neither those other saint-ships will I Here go about for to recite Their number, almost infinite; Which, one by one, here set down are In this most curious calendar. First, at the entrance of the gate, A little puppet-priest doth wait, Who squeaks to all the comers there, 'Favour your tongues, who enter here. 'Pure hands bring hither, without stain.' A second pules, 'Hence, hence, profane!' Hard by, i' th' shell of half a nut, The holy-water there is put; A little brush of squirrels' hairs, Composed of odd, not even pairs, Stands in the platter, or close by, To purge the fairy family. Near to the altar stands the priest, There offering up the holy-grist; Ducking in mood and perfect tense, With much good do't him reverence. The altar is not here four-square, Nor in a form triangular; Nor made of glass, or wood, or stone, But of a little transverse bone; Which boys and bruckel'd children call Playing for points and pins cockall. Whose linen-drapery is a thin, Subtile, and ductile codling's skin; Which o'er the board is smoothly spread With little seal-work damasked. The fringe that circumbinds it, too, Is spangle-work of trembling dew, Which, gently gleaming, makes a show, Like frost-work glitt'ring on the snow. Upon this fetuous board doth stand Something for shew-bread, and at hand Just in the middle of the altar Upon an end, the Fairy-psalter, Graced with the trout-flies' curious wings, Which serve for watchet ribbonings. Now, we must know, the elves are led Right by the Rubric, which they read: And if report of them be true, They have their text for what they do; Ay, and their book of canons too. And, as Sir Thomas Parson tells, They have their book of articles; And if that Fairy knight not lies They have their book of homilies; And other Scriptures, that design A short, but righteous discipline. The bason stands the board upon To take the free-oblation; A little pin-dust, which they hold More precious than we prize our gold; Which charity they give to many Poor of the parish, if there's any. Upon the ends of these neat rails, Hatch'd with the silver-light of snails, The elves, in formal manner, fix Two pure and holy candlesticks, In either which a tall small bent Burns for the altar's ornament. For sanctity, they have, to these, Their curious copes and surplices Of cleanest cobweb, hanging by In their religious vestery. They have their ash-pans and their brooms, To purge the chapel and the rooms; Their many mumbling mass-priests here, And many a dapper chorister. Their ush'ring vergers here likewise, Their canons and their chaunteries; Of cloister-monks they have enow, Ay, and their abbey-lubbers too: And if their legend do not lie, They much affect the papacy; And since the last is dead, there's hope Elve Boniface shall next be Pope. They have their cups and chalices, Their pardons and indulgences, Their beads of nits, bells, books, and wax- Candles, forsooth, and other knacks; Their holy oil, their fasting-spittle, Their sacred salt here, not a little. Dry chips, old shoes, rags, grease, and bones, Beside their fumigations. Many a trifle, too, and trinket, And for what use, scarce man would think it. Next then, upon the chanter's side An apple's-core is hung up dried, With rattling kernels, which is rung To call to morn and even-song. The saint, to which the most he prays And offers incense nights and days, The lady of the lobster is, Whose foot-pace he doth stroke and kiss, And, humbly, chives of saffron brings For his most cheerful offerings. When, after these, he's paid his vows, He lowly to the altar bows; And then he dons the silk-worm's shed, Like a Turk's turban on his head, And reverently departeth thence, Hid in a cloud of frankincense; And by the glow-worm's light well guided, Goes to the Feast that's now provided. A little mushroom-table spread, After short prayers, they set on bread, A moon-parch'd grain of purest wheat, With some small glitt'ring grit, to eat His choice bits with; then in a trice They make a feast less great than nice. But all this while his eye is served, We must not think his ear was sterved; But that there was in place to stir His spleen, the chirring grasshopper, The merry cricket, puling fly, The piping gnat for minstrelsy. And now, we must imagine first, The elves present, to quench his thirst, A pure seed-pearl of infant dew, Brought and besweeten'd in a blue And pregnant violet; which done, His kitling eyes begin to run Quite through the table, where he spies The horns of papery butterflies, Of which he eats; and tastes a little Of that we call the cuckoo's spittle; A little fuz-ball pudding stands By, yet not blessed by his hands, That was too coarse; but then forthwith He ventures boldly on the pith Of sugar'd rush, and eats the sagge And well-bestrutted bees' sweet bag; Gladding his palate with some store Of emmets' eggs; what would he more? But beards of mice, a newt's stew'd thigh, A bloated earwig, and a fly; With the red-capt worm, that's shut Within the concave of a nut, Brown as his tooth. A little moth, Late fatten'd in a piece of cloth; With wither'd cherries, mandrakes' ears, Moles' eyes: to these the slain stag's tears; The unctuous dewlaps of a snail, The broke-heart of a nightingale O'ercome in music; with a wine Ne'er ravish'd from the flattering vine, But gently prest from the soft side Of the most sweet and dainty bride, Brought in a dainty daisy, which He fully quaffs up, to bewitch His blood to height; this done, commended Grace by his priest; The feast is ended. Please your Grace, from out your store Give an alms to one that's poor, That your mickle may have more. Black I'm grown for want of meat, Give me then an ant to eat, Or the cleft ear of a mouse Over-sour'd in drink of souce; Or, sweet lady, reach to me The abdomen of a bee; Or commend a cricket's hip, Or his huckson, to my scrip; Give for bread, a little bit Of a pease that 'gins to chit, And my full thanks take for it. Flour of fuz-balls, that's too good For a man in needy-hood; But the meal of mill-dust can Well content a craving man; Any orts the elves refuse Well will serve the beggar's use. But if this may seem too much For an alms, then give me such Little bits that nestle there In the pris'ner's pannier. So a blessing light upon You, and mighty Oberon; That your plenty last till when I return your alms again. The Hag is astride, This night for to ride, The devil and she together; Through thick and through thin, Now out, and then in, Though ne'er so foul be the weather. A thorn or a bur She takes for a spur; With a lash of a bramble she rides now, Through brakes and through briars, O'er ditches and mires, She follows the spirit that guides now. No beast, for his food, Dares now range the wood, But hush'd in his lair he lies lurking; While mischiefs, by these, On land and on seas, At noon of night are a-working. The storm will arise, And trouble the skies This night; and, more for the wonder, The ghost from the tomb Affrighted shall come, Call'd out by the clap of the thunder. Good morrow to the day so fair; Good morning, sir, to you; Good morrow to mine own torn hair, Bedabbled with the dew. Good morning to this primrose too; Good morrow to each maid; That will with flowers the tomb bestrew Wherein my Love is laid. Ah! woe is me, woe, woe is me, Alack and well-a-day! For pity, sir, find out that bee, Which bore my Love away. I'll seek him in your bonnet brave; I'll seek him in your eyes; Nay, now I think they've made his grave I' th' bed of strawberries. I'll seek him there; I know, ere this, The cold, cold earth doth shake him; But I will go, or send a kiss By you, sir, to awake him. Pray hurt him not; though he be dead, He knows well who do love him; And who with green turfs rear his head, And who do rudely move him. He's soft and tender, pray take heed, With bands of cowslips bind him, And bring him home; but 'tis decreed That I shall never find him. One silent night of late, When every creature rested, Came one unto my gate, And knocking, me molested. Who's that, said I, beats there, And troubles thus the sleepy? Cast off; said he, all fear, And let not locks thus keep ye. For I a boy am, who By moonless nights have swerved; And all with showers wet through, And e'en with cold half starved. I pitiful arose, And soon a taper lighted; And did myself disclose Unto the lad benighted. I saw he had a bow, And wings too, which did shiver; And looking down below, I spied he had a quiver. I to my chimney's shine Brought him, as Love professes, And chafed his hands with mine, And dried his dropping tresses. But when he felt him warm'd, Let's try this bow of ours And string, if they be harm'd, Said he, with these late showers. Forthwith his bow he bent, And wedded string and arrow, And struck me, that it went Quite through my heart and marrow Then laughing loud, he flew Away, and thus said flying, Adieu, mine host, adieu, I'll leave thy heart a-dying. Love, like a gipsy, lately came, And did me much importune To see my hand, that by the same He might foretell my fortune. He saw my palm; and then, said he, I tell thee, by this score here, That thou, within few months, shalt be The youthful Prince D'Amour here. I smiled, and bade him once more prove, And by some cross-line show it, That I could ne'er be Prince of Love, Though here the Princely Poet. Let's now take our time, While we're in our prime, And old, old age is afar off; For the evil, evil days Will come on apace, Before we can be aware of. Fly me not, though I be gray, Lady, this I know you'll say; Better look the roses red, When with white commingled. Black your hairs are; mine are white; This begets the more delight, When things meet most opposite; As in pictures we descry Venus standing Vulcan by. Near to the well of wit, And drink your fill of it! Glory and worship be To you, sweet Maids, thrice three, Who still inspire me; And teach me how to sing Unto the lyric string, My measures ravishing! Then, while I sing your praise, My priest-hood crown with bays Green to the end of days! So Good-Luck came, and on my roof did light, Like noiseless snow, or as the dew of night; Not all at once, but gently, as the trees Are by the sun-beams, tickled by degrees. HERE, Here I live with what my board Can with the smallest cost afford; Though ne'er so mean the viands be, They well content my Prue and me: Or pea or bean, or wort or beet, Whatever comes, Content makes sweet. Here we rejoice, because no rent We pay for our poor tenement; Wherein we rest, and never fear The landlord or the usurer. The quarter-day does ne'er affright Our peaceful slumbers in the night: We eat our own, and batten more, Because we feed on no man's score; But pity those whose flanks grow great, Swell'd with the lard of other's meat. We bless our fortunes, when we see Our own beloved privacy; And like our living, where we're known To very few, or else to none. From the dull confines of the drooping west, To see the day spring from the pregnant east, Ravish'd in spirit, I come, nay more, I fly To thee, blest place of my nativity! Thus, thus with hallow'd foot I touch the ground, With thousand blessings by thy fortune crown'd. O fruitful Genius! that bestowest here An everlasting plenty year by year; O place! O people! manners! framed to please All nations, customs, kindreds, languages! I am a free-born Roman; suffer then That I amongst you live a citizen. London my home is; though by hard fate sent Into a long and irksome banishment; Yet since call'd back, henceforward let me be, O native country, repossess'd by thee! For, rather than I'll to the west return, I'll beg of thee first here to have mine urn. Weak I am grown, and must in short time fall; Give thou my sacred reliques burial. Give me a man that is not dull, When all the world with rifts is full; But unamazed dares clearly sing, Whenas the roof's a-tottering; And though it falls, continues still Tickling the Cittern with his quill. Say how or when Shall we, thy guests, Meet at those lyric feasts, Where we such clusters had, As made us nobly wild, not mad? And yet each verse of thine Out-did the meat, out-did the frolic wine. Or come again, Or send to us Thy wit's great overplus; But teach us yet Wisely to husband it, Lest we that talent spend; And having once brought to an end That precious stock, the store Of such a wit the world should have no more. Now is the time for mirth; For with flowery earth The golden pomp is come. The golden pomp is come; For now each tree does wear, Made of her pap and gum, Rich beads of amber here. Now reigns the Rose, and now Th' Arabian dew besmears My uncontrolled brow, And my retorted hairs. Homer, this health to thee! In sack of such a kind, That it would make thee see, Though thou wert ne'er so blind Next, Virgil I'll call forth, To pledge this second health In wine, whose each cup's worth An Indian commonwealth. A goblet next I'll drink To Ovid; and suppose Made he the pledge, he'd think The world had all one nose. Then this immensive cup Of aromatic wine, Catullus! I quaff up To that terse muse of thine. Wild I am now with heat: O Bacchus! cool thy rays; Or frantic I shall eat Thy Thyrse, and bite the Bays! Round, round, the roof does run; And being ravish'd thus, Come, I will drink a tun Now, to Tibullus next, This flood I drink to thee; But stay, I see a text, That this presents to me. Behold! Tibullus lies Here burnt, whose small return Of ashes scarce suffice To fill a little urn. Trust to good verses then; They only will aspire, When pyramids, as men, Are lost i' th' funeral fire. And when all bodies meet In Lethe to be drown'd; Then only numbers sweet With endless life are crown'd. Come then, and like two doves with silvery wings, Let our souls fly to th' shades, wherever springs Sit smiling in the meads; where balm and oil, Roses and cassia, crown the untill'd soil; Where no disease reigns, or infection comes To blast the air, but amber-gris and gums. This, that, and ev'ry thicket doth transpire More sweet than storax from the hallow'd fire; Where ev'ry tree a wealthy issue bears Of fragrant apples, blushing plums, or pears; And all the shrubs, with sparkling spangles, shew Like morning sun-shine, tinselling the dew. Here in green meadows sits eternal May, Purfling the margents, while perpetual day So double-gilds the air, as that no night Can ever rust th' enamel of the light: Here naked younglings, handsome striplings, run Their goals for virgins' kisses; which when done, Then unto dancing forth the learned round Commix'd they meet, with endless roses crown'd. And here we'll sit on primrose-banks, and see Love's chorus led by Cupid; and we'll he Two loving followers too unto the grove, Where poets sing the stories of our love. There thou shalt hear divine Musaeus sing Of Hero and Leander; then I'll bring Thee to the stand, where honour'd Homer reads His Odyssees and his high Iliads; About whose throne the crowd of poets throng To hear the incantation of his tongue: To Linus, then to Pindar; and that done, I'll bring thee, Herrick, to Anacreon, Quaffing his full-crown'd bowls of burning wine, And in his raptures speaking lines of thine, Like to his subject; and as his frantic Looks shew him truly Bacchanalian like, Besmear'd with grapes, welcome he shall thee thither, Where both may rage, both drink and dance together. Then stately Virgil, witty Ovid, by Whom fair Corinna sits, and doth comply With ivory wrists his laureat head, and steeps His eye in dew of kisses while he sleeps. Then soft Catullus, sharp-fang'd Martial, And towering Lucan, Horace, Juvenal, And snaky Persius; these, and those whom rage, Dropt for the jars of heaven, fill'd, t' engage All times unto their frenzies; thou shalt there Behold them in a spacious theatre: Among which glories, crown'd with sacred bays And flatt'ring ivy, two recite their plays, Beaumont and Fletcher, swans, to whom all ears Listen, while they, like sirens in their spheres, Sing their Evadne; and still more for thee There yet remains to know than thou canst see By glimm'ring of a fancy; Do but come, And there I'll shew thee that capacious room In which thy father, Jonson, now is placed As in a globe of radiant fire, and graced To be in that orb crown'd, that doth include Those prophets of the former magnitude, And he one chief. But hark! I hear the cock, The bell-man of the night, proclaim the clock Of late struck One; and now I see the prime Of day break from the pregnant east: 'tis time I vanish: more I had to say, But night determines here; Away! To sup with thee thou didst me home invite, And mad'st a promise that mine appetite Should meet and tire, on such lautitious meat, The like not Heliogabalus did eat: And richer wine would'st give to me, thy guest, Than Roman Sylla pour'd out at his feast. I came, 'tis true, and look'd for fowl of price, And for no less than aromatic wine Of maidens-blush, commix'd with jessamine. Clean was the hearth, the mantle larded jet, Which, wanting Lar and smoke, hung weeping wet; At last i' th' noon of winter, did appear A ragg'd soused neats-foot, with sick vinegar; And in a burnish'd flagonet, stood by Beer small as comfort, dead as charity. At which amazed, and pond'ring on the food, How cold it was, and how it chill'd my blood, I curst the master, and I damn'd the souce, And swore I'd got the ague of the house. Well, when to eat thou dost me next desire, I'll bring a fever, since thou keep'st no fire. Since to the country first I came, I have lost my former flame; And, methinks, I not inherit, As I did, my ravish'd spirit. If I write a verse or two, 'Tis with very much ado; In regard I want that wine Which should conjure up a line. Yet, though now of Muse bereft, I have still the manners left For to thank you, noble sir, For those gifts you do confer Upon him, who only can Be in prose a grateful man. Thrice, and above, blest, my soul's half, art thou, In thy both last and better vow; Could'st leave the city, for exchange, to see The country's sweet simplicity; And it to know and practise, with intent To grow the sooner innocent; By studying to know virtue, and to aim More at her nature than her name; The last is but the least; the first doth tell Ways less to live, than to live well: And both are known to thee, who now canst live Led by thy conscience, to give Justice to soon-pleased nature, and to show Wisdom and she together go, And keep one centre; This with that conspires To teach man to confine desires, And know that riches have their proper stint In the contented mind, not mint; And canst instruct that those who have the itch Of craving more, are never rich. These things thou knows't to th' height, and dost prevent That plague, because thou art content With that Heaven gave thee with a wary hand, More blessed in thy brass than land To keep cheap Nature even and upright; To cool, not cocker appetite. Thus thou canst tersely live to satisfy The belly chiefly, not the eye; Keeping the barking stomach wisely quiet, Less with a neat than needful diet. But that which most makes sweet thy country life, Is the fruition of a wife, Whom, stars consenting with thy fate, thou hast Got not so beautiful as chaste; By whose warm side thou dost securely sleep, While Love the sentinel doth keep, With those deeds done by day, which ne'er affright Thy silken slumbers in the night: Nor has the darkness power to usher in Fear to those sheets that know no sin. The damask'd meadows and the pebbly streams Sweeten and make soft your dreams: The purling springs, groves, birds, and well weaved bowers, With fields enamelled with flowers, Present their shapes, while fantasy discloses Millions of Lilies mix'd with Roses. Then dream, ye hear the lamb by many a bleat Woo'd to come suck the milky teat; While Faunus in the vision comes, to keep From rav'ning wolves the fleecy sheep: With thousand such enchanting dreams, that meet To make sleep not so sound as sweet; Nor call these figures so thy rest endear, As not to rise when Chanticlere Warns the last watch; but with the dawn dost rise To work, but first to sacrifice; Making thy peace with Heaven for some late fault, With holy-meal and spirting salt; Which done, thy painful thumb this sentence tells us, 'Jove for our labour all things sells us.' Nor are thy daily and devout affairs Attended with those desp'rate cares Th' industrious merchant has, who for to find Gold, runneth to the Western Ind, And back again, tortured with fears, doth fly, Untaught to suffer Poverty; But thou at home, blest with securest ease, Sitt'st, and believ'st that there be seas, And watery dangers; while thy whiter hap But sees these things within thy map; And viewing them with a more safe survey, Mak'st easy fear unto thee say, 'A heart thrice walled with oak and brass, that man Had, first durst plough the ocean.' But thou at home, without or tide or gale, Canst in thy map securely sail; Seeing those painted countries, and so guess By those fine shades, their substances; And from thy compass taking small advice, Buy'st travel at the lowest price. Nor are thine ears so deaf but thou canst hear, Far more with wonder than with fear, Fame tell of states, of countries, courts, and kings, And believe there be such things; When of these truths thy happier knowledge lies More in thine ears than in thine eyes. And when thou hear'st by that too true report, Vice rules the most, or all, at court, Thy pious wishes are, though thou not there, Virtue had, and moved her sphere. But thou liv'st fearless; and thy face ne'er shows Fortune when she comes, or goes; But with thy equal thoughts, prepared dost stand To take her by the either hand; Nor car'st which comes the first, the foul or fair: A wise man ev'ry way lies square; And like a surly oak with storms perplex'd Grows still the stronger, strongly vex'd. Be so, bold Spirit; stand centre-like, unmoved; And be not only thought, but proved To be what I report thee, and inure Thyself, if want comes, to endure; And so thou dost; for thy desires are Confined to live with private Lar: Nor curious whether appetite be fed Or with the first, or second bread. Who keep'st no proud mouth for delicious cates; Hunger makes coarse meats, delicates. Canst, and unurged, forsake that larded fare, Which art, not nature, makes so rare; To taste boil'd nettles, coleworts, beets, and eat These, and sour herbs, as dainty meat: While soft opinion makes thy Genius say, 'Content makes all ambrosia;' Nor is it that thou keep'st this stricter size So much for want, as exercise; To numb the sense of dearth, which, should sin haste it, Thou might'st but only see't, not taste it; Yet can thy humble roof maintain a quire Of singing crickets by thy fire; And the brisk mouse may feast herself with crumbs, Till that the green-eyed kitling comes; Then to her cabin, blest she can escape The sudden danger of a rape. And thus thy little well-kept stock doth prove, Wealth cannot make a life, but love. Nor art thou so close-handed, but canst spend, Counsel concurring with the end , As well as spare; still conning o'er this theme, To shun the first and last extreme; Ordaining that thy small stock find no breach, Or to exceed thy tether's reach; But to live round, and close, and wisely true To thine own self, and known to few. Thus let thy rural sanctuary be Elysium to thy wife and thee; There to disport your selves with golden measure; For seldom use commends the pleasure. Live, and live blest; thrice happy pair; let breath, But lost to one, be th' other's death: And as there is one love, one faith, one troth, Be so one death, one grave to both; Till when, in such assurance live, ye may Nor fear, or wish your dying day. Since shed or cottage I have none, I sing the more, that thou hast one; To whose glad threshold, and free door I may a Poet come, though poor; And eat with thee a savoury bit, Paying but common thanks for it. Yet should I chance, my Wicks, to see An over-leaven look in thee, To sour the bread, and turn the beer To an exalted vinegar; Or should'st thou prize me as a dish Of thrice-boil'd worts, or third-day's fish, I'd rather hungry go and come Than to thy house be burdensome; Yet, in my depth of grief, I'd be One that should drop his beads for thee. Is this a life, to break thy sleep, To rise as soon as day doth peep? To tire thy patient ox or ass By noon, and let thy good days pass, Not knowing this, that Jove decrees Some mirth, t' adulce man's miseries? No; 'tis a life to have thine oil Without extortion from thy soil; Thy faithful fields to yield thee grain, Although with some, yet little pain; To have thy mind, and nuptial bed, With fears and cares uncumbered A pleasing wife, that by thy side Lies softly panting like a bride; This is to live, and to endear Those minutes Time has lent us here. Then, while fates suffer, live thou free, As is that air that circles thee; And crown thy temples too; and let Thy servant, not thy own self, sweat, To strut thy barns with sheaves of wheat. Time steals away like to a stream, And we glide hence away with them: No sound recalls the hours once fled, Or roses, being withered; Nor us, my friend, when we are lost, Like to a dew, or melted frost. Then live we mirthful while we should, And turn the iron age to gold; Let's feast and frolic, sing and play, And thus less last, than live our day. Whose life with care is overcast, That man's not said to live, but last; Nor is't a life, seven years to tell, But for to live that half seven well; And that we'll do, as men who know, Some few sands spent, we hence must go, Both to be blended in the urn, From whence there's never a return. For brave comportment, wit without offence, Words fully flowing, yet of influence, Thou art that man of men, the man alone Worthy the public admiration; Who with thine own eyes read'st what we do write, And giv'st our numbers euphony and weight; Tell'st when a verse springs high; how understood To be, or not, born of the royal blood What state above, what symmetry below, Lines have, or should have, thou the best can show: For which, my Charles, it is my pride to be, Not so much known, as to be loved of thee: Long may I live so, and my wreath of bays Be less another's laurel, than thy praise. No news of navies burnt at seas; No closet plot or open vent, That frights men with a Parliament: No new device or late-found trick, To read by th' stars the kingdom's sick; No gin to catch the State, or wring The free-born nostril of the King, We send to you; but here a jolly Verse crown'd with ivy and with holly; That tells of winter's tales and mirth That milk-maids make about the hearth; Of Christmas sports, the wassail-bowl, That toss'd up, after Fox-i'-th'-hole; Of Blind-man-buff, and of the care That young men have to shoe the Mare; Of twelf-tide cakes, of pease and beans, Wherewith ye make those merry scenes, Whenas ye chuse your king and queen, And cry out, 'Hey for our town green!' Of ash-heaps, in the which ye use Husbands and wives by streaks to chuse; Of crackling laurel, which fore-sounds A plenteous harvest to your grounds; Of these, and such like things, for shift, We send instead of New-year's gift. Read then, and when your faces shine With buxom meat and cap'ring wine, Remember us in cups full crown'd, And let our city-health go round, Quite through the young maids and the men, To the ninth number, if not ten; Until the fired chestnuts leap For joy to see the fruits ye reap, From the plump chalice and the cup That tempts till it be tossed up. Then as ye sit about your embers, Call not to mind those fled Decembers; But think on these, that are t' appear, As daughters to the instant year; Sit crown'd with rose-buds, and carouse, Till LIBER PATER twirls the house About your ears, and lay upon The year, your cares, that's fled and gone: And let the russet swains the plough And harrow hang up resting now; And to the bag-pipe all address, Till sleep takes place of weariness. And thus throughout, with Christmas plays, Frolic the full twelve holy-days. Here we securely live, and eat The cream of meat; And keep eternal fires, By which we sit, and do divine, As wine And rage inspires. If full, we charm; then call upon To grace the frantic Thyrse: And having drunk, we raise a shout To praise his verse. Then cause we Horace to be read, Which sung or said, A goblet, to the brim, Of lyric wine, both swell'd and crown'd, We quaff to him. Thus, thus we live, and spend the hours In wine and flowers; And make the frolic year, The month, the week, the instant day To stay The longer here. Come then, brave Knight, and see the cell Wherein I dwell; And my enchantments too; Which love and noble freedom is: And this Shall fetter you. Take horse, and come; or be so kind To send your mind, Though but in numbers few: And I shall think I have the heart Or part Till I shall come again, let this suffice, I send my salt, my sacrifice To thee, thy lady, younglings, and as far To the worn threshold, porch, hall, parlour, kitchen, The fat-fed smoking temple, which in The wholesome savour of thy mighty chines, Invites to supper him who dines: Where laden spits, warp'd with large ribs of beef, Not represent, but give relief To the lank stranger and the sour swain, Where both may feed and come again; For no black-bearded Vigil from thy door Beats with a button'd-staff the poor; But from thy warm love-hatching gates, each may Take friendly morsels, and there stay To sun his thin-clad members, if he likes; For thou no porter keep'st who strikes. No comer to thy roof his guest-rite wants; Or, staying there, is scourged with taunts Of some rough groom, who, yirk'd with corns, says, 'Sir, 'You've dipp'd too long i' th' vinegar; 'And with our broth and bread and bits, Sir friend, 'You've fared well; pray make an end; 'Two days you've larded here; a third, ye know, 'Makes guests and fish smell strong; pray go 'You to some other chimney, and there take 'Essay of other giblets; make 'Merry at another's hearth; you're here 'Welcome as thunder to our beer; 'Manners knows distance, and a man unrude 'Would soon recoil, and not intrude 'His stomach to a second meal.' No, no, Thy house, well fed and taught, can show No such crabb'd vizard: Thou hast learnt thy train With heart and hand to entertain; And by the arms-full, with a breast unhid, As the old race of mankind did, When either's heart, and either's hand did strive To be the nearer relative; Thou dost redeem those times: and what was lost Of ancient honesty, may boast It keeps a growth in thee, and so will run A course in thy fame's pledge, thy son. Thus, like a Roman Tribune, thou thy gate Early sets ope to feast, and late; Keeping no currish waiter to affright, With blasting eye, the appetite, Which fain would waste upon thy cates, but that The trencher creature marketh what Best and more suppling piece he cuts, and by Some private pinch tells dangers nigh, A hand too desp'rate, or a knife that bites Skin-deep into the pork, or lights Upon some part of kid, as if mistook, When checked by the butler's look. No, no, thy bread, thy wine, thy jocund beer Is not reserved for Trebius here, But all who at thy table seated are, Find equal freedom, equal fare; And thou, like to that hospitable god, Jove, joy'st when guests make their abode To eat thy bullocks thighs, thy veals, thy fat Wethers, and never grudged at. The pheasant, partridge, gotwit, reeve, ruff, rail, The cock, the curlew, and the quail, These, and thy choicest viands, do extend Their tastes unto the lower end Of thy glad table; not a dish more known To thee, than unto any one: But as thy meat, so thy immortal wine Makes the smirk face of each to shine, And spring fresh rose-buds, while the salt, the wit, Flows from the wine, and graces it; While Reverence, waiting at the bashful board, Honours my lady and my lord. No scurril jest, no open scene is laid Here, for to make the face afraid; But temp'rate mirth dealt forth, and so discreet- Ly, that it makes the meat more sweet, And adds perfumes unto the wine, which thou Dost rather pour forth, than allow By cruse and measure; thus devoting wine, As the Canary isles were thine; But with that wisdom and that method, as No one that's there his guilty glass Drinks of distemper, or has cause to cry Repentance to his liberty. No, thou know'st orders, ethics, and hast read All oeconomics, know'st to lead A house-dance neatly, and canst truly show How far a figure ought to go, Forward or backward, side-ward, and what pace Can give, and what retract a grace; What gesture, courtship, comeliness agrees, With those thy primitive decrees, To give subsistence to thy house, and proof What Genii support thy roof, Goodness and greatness, not the oaken piles; For these, and marbles have their whiles To last, but not their ever; virtue's hand It is which builds 'gainst fate to stand. Such is thy house, whose firm foundations trust Is more in thee than in her dust, Or depth; these last may yield, and yearly shrink, Or yawning rupture can the same devour, But fix'd it stands, by her own power And well-laid bottom, on the iron and rock, Which tries, and counter-stands the shock And ram of time, and by vexation grows The stronger. Virtue dies when foes Are wanting to her exercise, but, great And large she spreads by dust and sweat. Safe stand thy walls, and thee, and so both will, Since neither's height was raised by th'ill Of others; since no stud, no stone, no piece Was rear'd up by the poor-man's fleece; No widow's tenement was rack'd to gild Or fret thy cieling, or to build A sweating-closet, to anoint the silk- Soft skin, or bath in asses' milk; No orphan's pittance, left him, served to set The pillars up of lasting jet, For which their cries might beat against thine ears, Or in the damp jet read their tears. No plank from hallow'd altar does appeal To yond' Star-chamber, or does seal A curse to thee, or thine; but all things even Make for thy peace, and pace to heaven. Go on directly so, as just men may A thousand times more swear, than say This is that princely Pemberton, who can Teach men to keep a God in man; And when wise poets shall search out to see Good men, they find them all in thee. All things decay with time: The forest sees The growth and down-fall of her aged trees; That timber tall, which three-score lustres stood The proud dictator of the state-like wood, I mean the sovereign of all plants, the oak, Droops, dies, and falls without the cleaver's stroke. Life of my life, take not so soon thy flight, But stay the time till we have bade good-night. Thou hast both wind and tide with thee; thy way As soon dispatch'd is by the night as day. Let us not then so rudely henceforth go Till we have wept, kiss'd, sigh'd, shook hands, or so. There's pain in parting, and a kind of hell When once true lovers take their last farewell. What? shall we two our endless leaves take here Without a sad look, or a solemn tear? He knows not love that hath not this truth proved, Love is most loth to leave the thing beloved. Pay we our vows and go; yet when we part, Then, even then, I will bequeath my heart Into thy loving hands; for I'll keep none To warm my breast, when thou, my pulse, art gone, No, here I'll last, and walk, a harmless shade, About this urn, wherein thy dust is laid, To guard it so, as nothing here shall be Heavy, to hurt those sacred seeds of thee. Ah, Posthumus! our years hence fly And leave no sound: nor piety, Or prayers, or vow Can keep the wrinkle from the brow; But we must on, As fate does lead or draw us; none, None, Posthumus, could e'er decline The doom of cruel Proserpine. The pleasing wife, the house, the ground Must all be left, no one plant found To follow thee, Save only the curst cypress-tree! A merry mind Looks forward, scorns what's left behind; Let's live, my Wickes, then, while we may, And here enjoy our holiday. We've seen the past best times, and these Will ne'er return; we see the seas, And moons to wane, But they fill up their ebbs again; But vanish'd man, Like to a lily lost, ne'er can, Ne'er can repullulate, or bring His days to see a second spring. But on we must, and thither tend, Where Ancus and rich Tullus blend Their sacred seed; Thus has infernal Jove decreed; We must be made, Ere long a song, ere long a shade. Why then, since life to us is short, Let's make it full up by our sport. Crown we our heads with roses then, And 'noint with Tyrian balm; for when We two are dead, The world with us is buried. Then live we free As is the air, and let us be Our own fair wind, and mark each one Day with the white and lucky stone. We are not poor, although we have No roofs of cedar, nor our brave Baiae, nor keep Account of such a flock of sheep; Nor bullocks fed To lard the shambles; barbels bred To kiss our hands; nor do we wish For Pollio's lampreys in our dish. If we can meet, and so confer, Both by a shining salt-cellar, And have our roof, Although not arch'd, yet weather-proof, And cieling free, From that cheap candle-baudery; We'll eat our bean with that full mirth As we were lords of all the earth. Well, then, on what seas we are tost, Our comfort is, we can't be lost. Let the winds drive Our bark, yet she will keep alive Amidst the deeps; 'Tis constancy, my Wickes, which keeps The pinnace up; which, though she errs I' th' seas, she saves her passengers. Say, we must part; sweet mercy bless Us both i' th' sea, camp, wilderness! Can we so far Stray, to become less circular Than we are now? No, no, that self-same heart, that vow Which made us one, shall ne'er undo, Or ravel so, to make us two. Live in thy peace; as for myself, When I am bruised on the shelf Of time, and show My locks behung with frost and snow; When with the rheum, The cough, the pthisic, I consume Unto an almost nothing; then, The ages fled, I'll call again, And with a tear compare these last Lame and bad times with those are past, My old lean wife, shall kiss it dry; And so we'll sit By th' fire, foretelling snow and slit And weather by our aches, grown Now old enough to be our own True calendars, as puss's ear Wash'd o'er 's, to tell what change is near; Then to assuage The gripings of the chine by age, I'll call my young Iulus to sing such a song I made upon my Julia's breast, And of her blush at such a feast. Then shall he read that flower of mine Enclosed within a crystal shrine; A primrose next; A piece then of a higher text; For to beget In me a more transcendant heat, Than that insinuating fire Which crept into each aged sire When the fair Helen from her eyes Shot forth her loving sorceries; At which I'll rear Mine aged limbs above my chair; And hearing it, Flutter and crow, as in a fit Of fresh concupiscence, and cry, 'No lust there's like to Poetry.' I'll call to mind things half-forgot; And oft between Repeat the times that I have seen; Thus ripe with tears, And twisting my Iulus' hairs, Doting, I'll weep and say, 'In truth, Baucis, these were my sins of youth.' Then next I'Il cause my hopeful lad, If a wild apple can be had, To crown the hearth; Lar thus conspiring with our mirth; Then to infuse Our browner ale into the cruse; Which, sweetly spiced, we'll first carouse Unto the Genius of the house. Then the next health to friends of mine. Loving the brave Burgundian wine, High sons of pith, Whose fortunes I have frolick'd with; Such as could well Bear up the magic bough and spell; And dancing 'bout the mystic Thyrse, Give up the just applause to verse; To those, and then again to thee, We'll drink, my Wickes, until we be Plump as the cherry, Though not so fresh, yet full as merry As the cricket, The untamed heifer, or the pricket, Until our tongues shall tell our ears, We're younger by a score of years. Thus, till we see the fire less shine From th' embers than the kitling's eyne, We'll still sit up, Sphering about the wassail cup, To all those times Which gave me honour for my rhymes; The coal once spent, we'll then to bed, Far more than night bewearied. Dull to myself, and almost dead to these, My many fresh and fragrant mistresses; Lost to all music now, since every thing Puts on the semblance here of sorrowing. Sick is the land to th' heart; and doth endure More dangerous faintings by her desperate cure. But if that golden age would come again, And Charles here rule, as he before did reign; If smooth and unperplex'd the seasons were, As when the sweet Maria lived here; I should delight to have my curls half drown'd In Tyrian dews, and head with roses crown'd: And once more yet, ere I am laid out dead, Knock at a star with my exalted head. A wearied pilgrim I have wander'd here, Twice five-and-twenty, bate me but one year; Long I have lasted in this world; 'tis true But yet those years that I have lived, but few. Who by his gray hairs doth his lustres tell, Lives not those years, but he that lives them well: One man has reach'd his sixty years, but he Of all those three-score has not lived half three: He lives who lives to virtue; men who cast Their ends for pleasure, do not live, but last. Come thou, who art the wine and wit Of all I've writ; The grace, the glory, and the best Piece of the rest; Thou art of what I did intend And what was made, was made to meet. Thee, thee my sheet. Come then, and be to my chaste side Both bed and bride. We two, as reliques left, will have One rest, one grave; And, hugging close, we need not fear Lust entering here, Where all desires are dead or cold, As is the mould; And all affections are forgot, Or trouble not. Here, here the slaves and prisoners be From shackles free; And weeping widows, long opprest, Do here find rest. The wronged client ends his laws Here, and his cause; Here those long suits of Chancery lie Quiet, or die; And all Star-chamber bills do cease, Or hold their peace. Here needs no court for our Request Where all are best; All wise, all equal, and all just Alike i'th' dust. Nor need we here to fear the frown Of court or crown; Where fortune bears no sway o'er things, There all are kings. In this securer place we'll keep, As lull'd asleep; Or for a little time we'll lie, As robes laid by, To be another day re-worn, Turn'd, but not torn; Or like old testaments engrost, Lock'd up, not lost; And for a-while lie here conceal'd, To be reveal'd Next, at that great Platonic year, And then meet here. Born I was to be old, And for to die here; After that, in the mould Long for to lie here. But before that day comes, Still I be bousing; For I know, in the tombs There's no carousing. A funeral stone Or verse, I covet none; But only crave Of you that I may have A sacred laurel springing from my grave: Which being seen Blest with perpetual green, May grow to be Not so much call'd a tree, As the eternal monument of me. Weep for the dead, for they have lost this light; And weep for me, lost in an endless night; Or mourn, or make a marble verse for me, Who writ for many. BENEDICTE. Lost to the world; lost to myself; alone Here now I rest under this marble stone, In depth of silence, heard and seen of none. Laid out for dead, let thy last kindness be With leaves and moss-work for to cover me; And while the wood-nymphs my cold corpse inter, Sing thou my dirge, sweet-warbling chorister! For epitaph, in foliage, next write this: Sadly I walk'd within the field, To see what comfort it would yield; And as I went my private way, An olive-branch before me lay; And seeing it, I made a stay, And took it up, and view'd it; then Kissing the omen, said Amen; Be, be it so, and let this be A divination unto me; That in short time my woes shall cease, And love shall crown my end with peace. If after rude and boisterous seas My wearied pinnace here finds ease; If so it be I've gain'd the shore, With safety of a faithful oar; If having run my barque on ground, Ye see the aged vessel crown'd; What's to be done? but on the sands Ye dance and sing, and now clap hands. The first act's doubtful, but we say It is the last commends the Play. Ye silent shades, whose each tree here Some relique of a saint doth wear; Who for some sweet-heart's sake, did prove The fire and martyrdom of Love: Here is the legend of those saints That died for love, and their complaints; Their wounded hearts, and names we find Encarved upon the leaves and rind. Give way, give way to me, who come Scorch'd with the self-same martyrdom! And have deserved as much, Love knows, As to be canonized 'mongst those Whose deeds and deaths here written are Within your Greeny-kalendar. By all those virgins' fillets hung Upon! your boughs, and requiems sung For saints and souls departed hence, Here honour'd still with frankincense; By all those tears that have been shed, As a drink-offering to the dead; By all those true-love knots, that be With mottoes carved on every tree; By sweet Saint Phillis! pity me; By dear Saint Iphis! and the rest Of all those other saints now blest, Me, me forsaken, here admit Among your myrtles to be writ; That my poor name may have the glory To live remember'd in your story. Among the myrtles as I walk'd Love and my sighs thus intertalk'd: Tell me, said I, in deep distress, Where I may find my Shepherdess? Thou fool, said Love, know'st thou not this? In every thing that's sweet she is. In yond' carnation go and seek, There thou shalt find her lip and cheek; In that enamell'd pansy by, There thou shalt have her curious eye; In bloom of peach and rose's bud, There waves the streamer of her blood. 'Tis true, said I; and thereupon I went to pluck them one by one, To make of parts an union; But on a sudden all were gone. At which I stopp'd; Said Love, these be The true resemblances of thee; For as these flowers, thy joys must die; And in the turning of an eye; And all thy hopes of her must wither, Like those short sweets here knit together. Happily I had a sight Of my dearest dear last night; Make her this day smile on me, And I'll roses give to thee! A crystal vial Cupid brought, Which had a juice in it: Of which who drank, he said, no thought Of Love he should admit. I, greedy of the prize, did drink, And emptied soon the glass; Which burnt me so, that I do think The fire of hell it was. Give me my earthen cups again, The crystal I contemn, Which, though enchased with pearls, contain A deadly draught in them. And thou, O Cupid! come not to My threshold, since I see, For all I have, or else can do, Thou still wilt cozen me. Whenas in silks my Julia goes, Till, then, methinks, how sweetly flows That liquefaction of her clothes! Next, when I cast mine eyes, and see That brave vibration each way free; O how that glittering taketh me! Why I tie about thy wrist, Julia, this my silken twist? For what other reason is't, But to shew thee how in part Thou my pretty captive art? But thy bond-slave is my heart; 'Tis but silk that bindeth thee, Knap the thread and thou art free; But 'tis otherwise with me; I am bound, and fast bound so, That from thee I cannot go; If I could, I would not so. As shews the air when with a rain-bow graced, So smiles that ribbon 'bout my Julia's waist; Or like Nay, 'tis that Zonulet of love, Wherein all pleasures of the world are wove. How rich and pleasing thou, my Julia, art, In each thy dainty and peculiar part! First, for thy Queen-ship on thy head is set Of flowers a sweet commingled coronet; About thy neck a carkanet is bound, A golden ring, that shines upon thy thumb; About thy wrist the rich Dardanium; Between thy breasts, than down of swans more white, There plays the Sapphire with the Chrysolite. No part besides must of thyself be known, When I behold a forest spread With silken trees upon thy head; And when I see that other dress Of flowers set in comeliness; When I behold another grace In the ascent of curious lace, Which, like a pinnacle, doth shew The top, and the top-gallant too; Then, when I see thy tresses bound Into an oval, square, or round, And knit in knots far more than I. Can tell by tongue, or True-love tie; Next, when those lawny films I see Play with a wild civility; And all those airy silks to flow, Alluring me, and tempting so I must confess, mine eye and heart Dotes less on nature than on art. See'st thou that cloud as silver clear, Plump, soft, and swelling every where? 'Tis Julia's bed, and she sleeps there. Some ask'd me where the Rubies grew: And nothing I did say, But with my finger pointed to The lips of Julia. Some ask'd how Pearls did grow, and where: Then spoke I to my girl, To part her lips, and shew me there The quarrelets of Pearl. I dreamt the Roses one time went To meet and sit in Parliament; The place for these, and for the rest Of flowers, was thy spotless breast. Over the which a state was drawn Of tiffany, or cob-web lawn; Then in that Parly all those powers Voted the Rose the Queen of flowers; But so, as that herself should be The Maid of Honour unto thee. Droop, droop no more, or hang the head, Ye roses almost withered; Now strength, and newer purple get, Each here declining violet. O primroses! let this day be A resurrection unto ye; And to all flowers allied in blood, Or sworn to that sweet sisterhood. For health on Julia's cheek hath shed Claret and cream commingled; And those, her lips, do now appear As beams of coral, but more clear. Dew sate on Julia's hair, And spangled too, Like leaves that laden are With trembling dew; Or glitter'd to my sight, As when the beams Have their reflected light Danced by the streams. Cherry-ripe, ripe, ripe, I cry, Full and fair ones; come, and buy: If so be you ask me where They do grow? I answer, there Where my Julia's lips do smile; There's the land, or cherry-isle; Whose plantations fully show All the year where cherries grow. As Julia once a-slumb'ring lay, It chanced a bee did fly that way, After a dew, or dew-like shower, To tipple freely in a flower; For some rich flower, he took the lip Of Julia, and began to sip; But when he felt he suck'd from thence Honey, and in the quintessence, He drank so much he scarce could stir; So Julia took the pilferer. And thus surprised, as filchers use, He thus began himself t'excuse: 'Sweet lady-flower, I never brought Hither the least one thieving thought; But taking those rare lips of yours For some fresh, fragrant, luscious flowers, I thought I might there take a taste, Where so much sirup ran at waste. Besides, know this, I never sting The flower that gives me nourishing; But with a kiss, or thanks, do pay For honey that I bear away.' This said, he laid his little scrip Of honey 'fore her ladyship, And told her, as some tears did fall, That, that he took, and that was all. At which she smiled, and bade him go And take his bag; but thus much know, When next he came a-pilfering so, He should from her full lips derive Honey enough to fill his hive. Under a lawn, than skies more clear, Some ruffled Roses nestling were, And snugging there, they seem'd to lie As in a flowery nunnery; They blush'd, and look'd more fresh than flowers Quickened of late by pearly showers; And all, because they were possest But of the heat of Julia's breast, Which, as a warm and moisten'd spring, Gave them their ever-flourishing. My soul would one day go and seek For roses, and in Julia's cheek A richess of those sweets she found, As in another Rosamond; But gathering roses as she was, Not knowing what would come to pass, it chanced a ringlet of her hair Caught my poor soul, as in a snare; Which ever since has been in thrall; Yet freedom she enjoys withal. When I thy singing next shall hear, I'll wish I might turn all to ear, To drink-in notes and numbers, such As blessed souls can't hear too much Then melted down, there let me lie Entranced, and lost confusedly; And by thy music strucken mute, Die, and be turn'd into a Lute. Her eyes the glow-worm lend thee, The shooting stars attend thee; And the elves also, Whose little eyes glow Like the sparks of fire, befriend thee. No Will-o'th'-Wisp mis-light thee, Nor snake or slow-worm bite thee; But on, on thy way, Not making a stay, Since ghost there's none to affright thee. Let not the dark thee cumber; What though the moon does slumber? The stars of the night Will lend thee their light, Like tapers clear, without number. Then, Julia, let me woo thee, Thus, thus to come unto me; And when I shall meet Thy silvery feet, My soul I'll pour into thee. Why dost thou wound and break my heart, As if we should for ever part? Hast thou not heard an oath from me, After a day, or two, or three, I would come back and live with thee? Take, if thou dost distrust that vow, This second protestation now: Upon thy cheek that spangled tear, Which sits as dew of roses there, That tear shall scarce be dried before I'll kiss the threshold of thy door; Then weep not, Sweet, but thus much know, I'm half returned before I go. When that day comes, whose evening says I'm gone Unto that watery desolation; Devoutly to thy Closet-gods then pray, That my wing'd ship may meet no Remora. Those deities which circum-walk the seas, And look upon our dreadful passages, Will from all dangers re-deliver me, For one drink-offering poured out by thee, Mercy and Truth live with thee! and forbear, In my short absence, to unsluice a tear; But yet for love's-sake, let thy lips do this, Give my dead picture one engendering kiss; Work that to life, and let me ever dwell In thy remembrance, Julia. So farewell. I have been wanton, and too bold, I fear, To chafe o'er-much the virgin's cheek or ear; Beg for my pardon, Julia! he doth win Grace with the gods who's sorry for his sin. That done, my Julia, dearest Julia, come, And go with me to chuse my burial room: My fates are ended; when thy Herrick dies, Clasp thou his book, then close thou up his eyes. Immortal clothing I put on So soon as, Julia, I am gone To mine eternal mansion. Thou, thou art here, to human sight Clothed all with incorrupted light; But yet how more admir'dly bright Wilt thou appear, when thou art set In thy refulgent thronelet, That shin'st thus in thy counterfeit! Whatsoever thing I see, Rich or poor although it be, 'Tis a mistress unto me. Be my girl or fair or brown, Does she smile, or does she frown; Still I write a sweet-heart down. Be she rough, or smooth of skin; When I touch, I then begin For to let affection in. Be she bald, or does she wear Locks incurl'd of other hair; I shall find enchantment there. Be she whole, or be she rent, So my fancy be content, She's to me most excellent. Be she fat, or be she lean; I'm a man for every scene. I held Love's head while it did ache; But so it chanced to be, The cruel pain did his forsake, And forthwith came to me. Ai me! how shall my grief be still'd? Or where else shall we find One like to me, who must be kill'd For being too-too-kind? I could but see thee yesterday Stung by a fretful bee; And I the javelin suck'd away, And heal'd the wound in thee. A thousand thorns, and briars, and stings I have in my poor breast; Yet ne'er can see that salve which brings My passions any rest. As Love shall help me, I admire How thou canst sit and smile To see me bleed, and not desire To staunch the blood the while. If thou, composed of gentle mould, Art so unkind to me; What dismal stories will be told Of those that cruel be! When I thy parts run o'er, I can't espy In any one, the least indecency; But every line and limb diffused thence A fair and unfamiliar excellence; So that the more I look, the more I prove There's still more cause why I the more should love. What conscience, say, is it in thee, When I a heart had one, To take away that heart from me, And to retain thy own? For shame or pity, now incline To play a loving part; Either to send me kindly thine, Or give me back my heart. Covet not both; but if thou dost Resolve to part with neither; Why! yet to shew that thou art just, Take me and mine together. I dare not ask a kiss, I dare not beg a smile; Lest having that, or this, I might grow proud the while. No, no, the utmost share Of my desire shall be, Only to kiss that air That lately kissed thee, Bid me to live, and I will live Or bid me love, and I will give A loving heart to thee. A heart as soft, a heart as kind, A heart as sound and free As in the whole world thou canst find, That heart I'll give to thee. Bid that heart stay, and it will stay To honour thy decree; Or bid it languish quite away, And't shall do so for thee. Bid me to weep, and I will weep, While I have eyes to see; And having none, yet I will keep A heart to weep for thee. Bid me despair, and I'll despair, Under that cypress tree; Or bid me die, and I will dare E'en death, to die for thee. Thou art my life, my love, my heart, The very eyes of me; And hast command of every part, To live and die for thee. Anthea laugh'd, and, fearing lest excess Might stretch the cords of civil comeliness She with a dainty blush rebuked her face, And call'd each line back to his rule and space. Let fair or foul my mistress be, Or low, or tall, she pleaseth me; Or let her walk, or stand, or sit, The posture her's, I'm pleased with it; Or let her tongue be still, or stir Graceful is every thing from her; Or let her grant, or else deny, My love will fit each history. Give me one kiss, And no more: If so be, this Makes you poor To enrich you, I'll restore For that one, two- Thousand score. Clear are her eyes, Like purest skies; Discovering from thence A baby there That turns each sphere, Her pretty feet Like snails did creep A little out, and then, As if they played at Bo-peep, Did soon draw in again. Come, come away Or let me go; Must I here stay Because you're slow, And will continue so; I scorn to be A slave to state; And since I'm free, I will not wait, Henceforth at such a rate, For needy fate. If you desire My spark should glow, The peeping fire You must blow; Or I shall quickly grow To frost, or snow. AND, cruel maid, because I see You scornful of my love, and me, I'll trouble you no more, but go My way, where you shall never know What is become of me; there I Will find me out a path to die, Or learn some way how to forget You and your name for ever; yet Ere I go hence, know this from me, What will in time your fortune be; This to your coyness I will tell; And having spoke it once, Farewell. The lily will not long endure, Nor the snow continue pure; The rose, the violet, one day See both these lady-flowers decay; And you must fade as well as they. And it may chance that love may turn, And, like to mine, make your heart burn And weep to see't; yet this thing do, That my last vow commends to you; When you shall see that I am dead, For pity let a tear be shed; And, with your mantle o'er me cast, Give my cold lips a kiss at last; If twice you kiss, you need not fear That I shall stir or live more here. Next hollow out a tomb to cover Me, me, the most despised lover; And write thereon, THIS, READER, KNOW; LOVE KILL'D THIS MAN. No more, but so. You say I love not, 'cause I do not play Still with your curls, and kiss the time away. You blame me, too, because I can't devise Some sport, to please those babies in your eyes; By Love's religion, I must here confess it, The most I love, when I the least express it. Shall griefs find tongues; full casks are ever found To give, if any, yet but little sound. Deep waters noiseless are; and this we know, That chiding streams betray small depth below. So when love speechless is, she doth express A depth in love, and that depth bottomless. Now, since my love is tongueless, know me such, Who speak but little, 'cause I love so much. My faithful friend, if you can see The fruit to grow up, or the tree; If you can see the colour come Into the blushing pear or plum; If you can see the water grow To cakes of ice, or flakes of snow; If you can see that drop of rain Lost in the wild sea once again; If you can see how dreams do creep Into the brain by easy sleep: Then there is hope that you may see Her love me once, who now hates me. To my revenge, and to her desperate fears, Fly, thou made bubble of my sighs and tears! In the wild air, when thou hast roll'd about, And, like a blasting planet, found her out; Stoop, mount, pass by to take her eye then glare Like to a dreadful comet in the air: Next, when thou dost perceive her fixed sight For thy revenge to be most opposite, Then, like a globe, or ball of wild-fire, fly, And break thyself in shivers on her eye! A sweet disorder in the dress Kindles in clothes a wantonness; A lawn about the shoulders thrown Into a fine distraction; An erring lace, which here and there Enthrals the crimson stomacher; A cuff neglectful, and thereby Ribbons to flow confusedly; A winning wave, deserving note, In the tempestuous petticoat; A careless shoe-string, in whose tie I see a wild civility; Do more bewitch me, than when art Is too precise in every part. Pardon my trespass, Silvia! I confess My kiss out-went the bounds of shamefacedness: None is discreet at all times; no, not Jove Himself, at one time, can be wise and love. Let us, though late, at last, my Silvia, wed; And loving lie in one devoted bed. Thy watch may stand, my minutes fly post haste; No sound calls back the year that once is past. Then, sweetest Silvia, let's no longer stay; True love, we know, precipitates delay. Away with doubts, all scruples hence remove! No man, at one time, can be wise, and love. We two are last in hell; what may we fear To be tormented or kept pris'ners here I Alas! if kissing be of plagues the worst, We'll wish in hell we had been last and first. You say you're sweet: how should we know Whether that you be sweet or no? From powders and perfumes keep free; Then we shall smell how sweet you be! Three lovely sisters working were, As they were closely set, Of soft and dainty maiden-hair, A curious Armilet. I, smiling, ask'd them what they did, Fair Destinies all three? Who told me they had drawn a thread Of life, and 'twas for me. They shew'd me then how fine 'twas spun And I replied thereto; 'I care not now how soon 'tis done, Or cut, if cut by you.' By those soft tods of wool, With which the air is full; By all those tinctures there That paint the hemisphere; By dews and drizzling rain, That swell the golden grain; By all those sweets that be I'th' flowery nunnery; By silent nights, and the Three forms of Hecate; By all aspects that bless The sober sorceress, While juice she strains, and pith To make her philtres with; By Time, that hastens on Things to perfection; And by your self, the best Conjurement of the rest; In love with none but me. Sapho, I will chuse to go Where the northern winds do blow Endless ice, and endless snow; Rather than I once would see But a winter's face in thee, To benumb my hopes and me. How Love came in, I do not know, Whether by th'eye, or ear, or no; Or whether with the soul it came, At first, infused with the same; Whether in part 'tis here or there, Or, like the soul, whole every where. This troubles me; but I as well As any other, this can tell; That when from hence she does depart, The outlet then is from the heart. Sweet, be not proud of those two eyes, Which, star-like, sparkle in their skies; Nor be you proud, that you can see All hearts your captives, yours, yet free; Be you not proud of that rich hair Which wantons with the love-sick air; Whenas that ruby which you wear, Sunk from the tip of your soft ear, Will last to be a precious stone, When all your world of beauty's gone. Dear, though to part it be a hell, Yet, Dianeme, now farewell! Thy frown last night did bid me go, But whither, only grief does know. I do beseech thee, ere we part, If merciful, as fair thou art; Or else desir'st that maids should tell Thy pity by Love's chronicle O, Dianeme, rather kill Me, than to make me languish still! 'Tis cruelty in thee to th' height, Thus, thus to wound, not kill outright; Yet there's a way found, if thou please, By sudden death, to give me ease; And thus devised, do thou but this, Bequeath to me one parting kiss! So sup'rabundant joy shall be The executioner of me. Me pay the debt I owe thee for a kiss Thou lend'st to me; And I to thee Will render ten for this. If thou wilt say, Ten will not pay For that so rich a one; I'll clear the sum, If it will come Unto a million. He must of right, To th' utmost mite, Make payment for his pleasure, By this I guess Of happiness Who has a little measure. I have lost, and lately, these Many dainty mistresses: Stately Julia, prime of all; Sapho next, a principal: Smooth Anthea, for a skin White, and heaven-like crystalline: Sweet Electra, and the choice Myrha, for the lute and voice. Next, Corinna, for her wit, And the graceful use of it; With Perilla: All are gone; Only Herrick's left alone, For to number sorrow by Their departures hence, and die. Come, bring your sampler, and with art Draw in't a wounded heart, And dropping here and there; Not that I think that any dart Can make your's bleed a tear, Or pierce it any where; Yet do it to this end, that I May by This secret see, Though you can make That heart to bleed, your's ne'er will ache For me, You may vow I'll not forget To pay the debt Which to thy memory stands as due As faith can seal it you. Take then tribute of my tears; So long as I have fears To prompt me, I shall ever Languish and look, but thy return see never. Oh then to lessen my despair, Print thy lips into the air, So by this Means, I may kiss thy kiss, Whenas some kind Shall hither waft it: And, in lieu, My lips shall send a thousand back to you. Thou see'st me, Lucia, this year droop; Three zodiacs fill'd more, I shall stoop; Let crutches then provided be To shore up my debility: Then, while thou laugh'st, I'll sighing cry, A ruin underpropt am I: Don will I then my beadsman's gown; And when so feeble I am grown As my weak shoulders cannot bear The burden of a grasshopper; Yet with the bench of aged sires, When I and they keep termly fires, With my weak voice I'll sing, or say Some odes I made of Lucia; Then will I heave my wither'd hand To Jove the mighty, for to stand Thy faithful friend, and to pour down Upon thee many a benison. Anthea, I am going hence With some small stock of innocence; But yet those blessed gates I see Withstanding entrance unto me; To pray for me do thou begin; The porter then will let me in. Now is the time when all the lights wax dim; And thou, Anthea, must withdraw from him Who was thy servant: Dearest, bury me Under that holy-oak, or gospel-tree; Where, though thou see'st not, thou may'st think upon Me, when thou yearly go'st procession; Or, for mine honour, lay me in that tomb In which thy sacred reliques shall have room; For my embalming, Sweetest, there will be No spices wanting, when I'm laid by thee. One night i'th' year, my dearest Beauties, come, And bring those dew-drink-offerings to my tomb; When thence ye see my reverend ghost to rise, And there to lick th' effused sacrifice, Though paleness be the livery that I wear, Look ye not wan or colourless for fear. Trust me, I will not hurt ye, or once show The least grim look, or cast a frown on you; Nor shall the tapers, when I'm there, burn blue. This I may do, perhaps, as I glide by, Cast on my girls a glance, and loving eye; Or fold mine arms, and sigh, because I've lost The world so soon, and in it, you the most: Than these, no fears more on your fancies fall, Though then I smile, and speak no words at all. Ah, my Perilla! dost thou grieve to see Me, day by day, to steal away from thee? Age calls me hence, and my gray hairs bid come, And haste away to mine eternal home; 'Twill not be long, Perilla, after this, That I must give thee the supremest kiss: Dead when I am, first cast in salt, and bring Part of the cream from that religious spring, With which, Perilla, wash my hands and feet; That done, then wind me in that very sheet Which wrapt thy smooth limbs, when thou didst implore The Gods' protection, but the night before; Follow me weeping to my turf, and there Let fall a primrose, and with it a tear: Then lastly, let some weekly strewings be Devoted to the memory of me; Then shall my ghost not walk about, but keep Still in the cool and silent shades of sleep. You are a Tulip seen to-day, But, Dearest, of so short a stay, That where you grew, scarce man can say. You are a lovely July-flower; Yet one rude wind, or ruffling shower, Will force you hence, and in an hour. You are a sparkling Rose i'th' bud, Yet lost, ere that chaste flesh and blood Can show where you or grew or stood. You are a full-spread fair-set Vine, And can with tendrils love entwine; Yet dried, ere you distil your wine. You are like Balm, enclosed well In amber, or some crystal shell; Yet lost ere you transfuse your smell. You are a dainty Violet; Yet wither'd, ere you can be set Within the virgins coronet. You are the Queen all flowers among; But die you must, fair maid, ere long, As he, the maker of this song. Gather ye rose-buds while ye may: Old Time is still a-flying; And this same flower that smiles to-day, To-morrow will be dying. The glorious lamp of heaven, the Sun, The higher he's a-getting, The sooner will his race be run, And nearer he's to setting. That age is best, which is the first, When youth and blood are warmer; But being spent, the worse, and worst Times, still succeed the former. Then be not coy, but use your time, And while ye may, go marry; For having lost but once your prime, You may for ever tarry. Let others to the printing-press run fast; Since after death comes glory, I'll not haste. All has been plunder'd from me but my wit: Fortune herself can lay no claim to it. Things are uncertain; and the more we get, The more on icy pavements we are set. No man such rare parts hath, that he can swim, If favour or occasion help not him. Praise, they that will, times past: I joy to see Myself now live; this age best pleaseth me! Want is a softer wax, that takes thereon, This, that, and every base impression, For all our works a recompence is sure; 'Tis sweet to think on what was hard t'endure. When words we want, Love teacheth to indite; And what we blush to speak, she bids us write. Beauty no other thing is, than a beam Flash'd out between the middle and extreme. Though frankincense the deities require, We must not give all to the hallow'd fire. Such be our gifts, and such be our expense, As for ourselves to leave some frankincense. When all birds else do of their music fail, Money's the still-sweet-singing nightingale! Knew'st thou one month would take thy life away, Thou'dst weep; but laugh, should it not last a day. Tears, though they're here below the sinner's brine, Above, they are the Angels' spiced wine. Love's of itself too sweet; the best of all Is, when love's honey has a dash of gall. Great cities seldom rest; if there be none T' invade from far, they'll find worse foes at home. Those ends in war the best contentment bring, Whose peace is made up with a pardoning. Twixt truth and error, there's this difference known Error is fruitful, truth is only one. Dread not the shackles; on with thine intent, Good wits get more fame by their punishment. Man may want land to live in; but for all Nature finds out some place for burial. If little labour, little are our gains; Man's fortunes are according to his pains. Drink wine, and live here blitheful while ye may; The morrow's life too late is; Live to-day. While fates permit us, let's be merry; Pass all we must the fatal ferry; And this our life, too, whirls away, With the rotation of the day. Every time seems short to be That's measured by felicity; But one half-hour that's made up here With grief, seems longer than a year. True mirth resides not in the smiling skin; The sweetest solace is to act no sin. In prayer the lips ne'er act the winning part Without the sweet concurrence of the heart. Love is a circle, that doth restless move In the same sweet eternity of Love. Here we are all, by day; by night we're hurl'd By dreams, each one into a several world. In man, ambition is the common'st thing; Each one by nature loves to be a king. What though the sea be calm? Trust to the shore; Ships have been drown'd, where late they danced before. Men say you're fair; and fair ye are, 'tis true; But, hark! we praise the painter now, not you. Wrinkles no more are, or no less, Than beauty turn'd to sourness. Good things, that come of course, far less do please Than those which come by sweet contingencies. Let's live in haste; use pleasures while we may; Could life return, 'twould never lose a day. Nothing comes free-cost here; Jove will not let His gifts go from him, if not bought with sweat. Man knows where first he ships himself; but he Never can tell where shall his landing be. Great men by small means oft are overthrown; He's lord of thy life, who contemns his own. Who with a little cannot be content, Endures an everlasting punishment. Man is composed here of a twofold part; The first of nature, and the next of art; Art presupposes nature; nature, she Prepares the way for man's docility. No wrath of men, or rage of seas, Can shake a just man's purposes; No threats of tyrants, or the grim Visage of them can alter him; But what he doth at first intend, That he holds firmly to the end. Health is the first good lent to men; A gentle disposition then: Next, to be rich by no by-ways; Lastly, with friends t' enjoy our days. Man is a watch, wound up at first, but never Wound up again; Once down, he's down for ever. The watch once down, all motions then do cease; The man's pulse stopt, all passions sleep in peace. I ask'd thee oft what poets thou hast read, And lik'st the best? Still thou repli'st, The dead. I shall, ere long, with green turfs cover'd be; Then sure thou'lt like, or thou wilt envy, me. Live by thy Muse thou shalt, when others die, Leaving no fame to long posterity; When monarchies trans-shifted are, and gone, Here shall endure thy vast dominion. I call, I call: who do ye call? The maids to catch this cowslip ball! But since these cowslips fading be, Troth, leave the flowers, and maids, take me! Yet, if that neither you will do, Speak but the word, and I'll take you, First, April, she with mellow showers Opens the way for early flowers; Then after her comes smiling May, In a more rich and sweet array; Next enters June, and brings us more Gems than those two that went before; Then, lastly, July comes, and she More wealth brings in than all those three. Fair pledges of a fruitful tree, Why do ye fall so fast? Your date is not so past, But you may stay yet here a-while, To blush and gently smile; And go at last. What, were ye born to be An hour or half's delight; And so to bid good-night? 'Twas pity Nature brought ye forth, Merely to show your worth, And lose you quite. But you are lovely leaves, where we May read how soon things have Their end, though ne'er so brave: And after they have shown their pride, Like you, a-while; they glide Into the grave. Love in a shower of blossoms came Down, and half drown'd me with the same; The blooms that fell were white and red; But with such sweets commingled, As whether this I cannot tell, My sight was pleased more, or my smell; But true it was, as I roll'd there, Without a thought of hurt or fear, Love turn'd himself into a bee, And with his javelin wounded me; - From which mishap this use I make; Where most sweets are, there lies a snake; Kisses and favours are sweet things; But those have thorns, and these have stings. Go, happy Rose, and interwove With other flowers, bind my Love. Tell her, too, she must not be Longer flowing, longer free, That so oft has fetter'd me. Say, if she's fretful, I have bands Of pearl and gold, to bind her hands; Tell her, if she struggle still, I have myrtle rods at will, For to tame, though not to kill. Take thou my blessing thus, and go And tell her this, but do not so! Lest a handsome anger fly Like a lightning from her eye, And burn thee up, as well as I! The Rose was sick, and smiling died; And, being to be sanctified, About the bed, there sighing stood The sweet and flowery sisterhood. Some hung the head, while some did bring, To wash her, water from the spring; Some laid her forth, while others wept, But all a solemn fast there kept. The holy sisters some among, The sacred dirge and trental sung; But ah! what sweets smelt everywhere, As heaven had spent all perfumes there! At last, when prayers for the dead, And rites, were all accomplished, They, weeping, spread a lawny loom, And closed her up as in a tomb. From this bleeding hand of mine, Take this sprig of Eglantine: Which, though sweet unto your smell, Yet the fretful briar will tell, He who plucks the sweets, shall prove Many thorns to be in love. Stay while ye will, or go, And leave no scent behind ye: Yet trust me, I shall know The place where I may find ye. Within my Lucia's cheek, Whose livery ye wear Play ye at hide or seek, I'm sure to find ye there. Ah, Cruel Love! must I endure Thy many scorns, and find no cure? Say, are thy medicines made to be Helps to all others but to me? I'll leave thee, and to Pansies come: Comforts you'll afford me some: You can ease my heart, and do What Love could ne'er be brought unto. Frolic virgins once these were, Overloving, living here; Being here their ends denied Ran for sweet-hearts mad, and died. Love, in pity of their tears, And their loss in blooming years, For their restless here-spent hours, Gave them hearts-ease turn'd to flowers. These fresh beauties, we can prove, Once were virgins, sick of love, Turn'd to flowers: still in some, Colours go and colours come. Ask me why I send you here This sweet Infanta of the year? Ask me why I send to you This Primrose, thus bepearl'd with dew? I will whisper to your ears, The sweets of love are mixt with tears. Ask me why this flower does show So yellow-green, and sickly too? Ask me why the stalk is weak And bending, yet it doth not break? I will answer, these discover What fainting hopes are in a lover. Why do ye weep, sweet babes? can tears Speak grief in you, Who were but born just as the modest morn Teem'd her refreshing dew? Alas, you have not known that shower That mars a flower, Nor felt th' unkind Breath of a blasting wind, Nor are ye worn with years; Or warp'd as we, Who think it strange to see, Such pretty flowers, like to orphans young, To speak by tears, before ye have a tongue. Speak, whimp'ring younglings, and make known The reason why Ye droop and weep; Is it for want of sleep, Or childish lullaby? Or that ye have not seen as yet The violet? Or brought a kiss From that Sweet-heart, to this? No, no, this sorrow shown By your tears shed, Would have this lecture read, That things of greatest, so of meanest worth, Conceived with grief are, and with tears brought forth. Shut not so soon; the dull-eyed night Has not as yet begun To make a seizure on the light, Or to seal up the sun. No marigolds yet closed are, No shadows great appear; Nor doth the early shepherds' star Shine like a spangle here. Stay but till my Julia close Her life-begetting eye; And let the whole world then dispose Itself to live or die. Fair Daffadils, we weep to see You haste away so soon; As yet the early-rising sun Has not attain'd his noon. Stay, stay, Until the hasting day Has run But to the even-song; And, having pray'd together, we Will go with you along. We have short time to stay, as you; We have as short a spring; As quick a growth to meet decay, As you, or any thing. We die As your hours do, and dry Like to the summer's rain; Or as the pearls of morning's dew, Ne'er to be found again. Welcome, maids of honour, You do bring And wait upon her. She has virgins many, Fresh and fair; Yet you are More sweet than any. You're the maiden posies; And so graced, To be placed 'Fore damask roses. Yet, though thus respected, By and by Ye do lie, Poor girls, neglected. To gather flowers, Sappha went, And homeward she did bring Within her lawny continent, The treasure of the Spring. She smiling blush'd, and blushing smiled, And sweetly blushing thus, She look'd as she'd been got with child By young Favonius. Her apron gave, as she did pass, An odour more divine, More pleasing too, than ever was You have beheld a smiling rose When virgins' hands have drawn O'er it a cobweb-lawn: And here, you see, this lily shows, Tomb'd in a crystal stone, More fair in this transparent case Than when it grew alone, And had but single grace. You see how cream but naked is, Nor dances in the eye Without a strawberry; Or some fine tincture, like to this, Which draws the sight thereto, More by that wantoning with it, Than when the paler hue No mixture did admit. You see how amber through the streams More gently strokes the sight, With some conceal'd delight, Than when he darts his radiant beams Into the boundless air; Where either too much light his worth Doth all at once impair, Or set it little forth. Put purple grapes or cherries in- To glass, and they will send More beauty to commend Them, from that clean and subtle skin, Than if they naked stood, And had no other pride at all, But their own flesh and blood, And tinctures natural. Thus lily, rose, grape, cherry, cream, And strawberry do stir More love, when they transfer A weak, a soft, a broken beam; Than if they should discover At full their proper excellence, Without some scene cast over, To juggle with the sense. Thus let this crystall'd lily be A rule, how far to teach Your nakedness must reach; And that no further than we see Those glaring colours laid By art's wise hand, but to this end They should obey a shade, Lest they too far extend. So though you're white as swan or snow, And have the power to move A world of men to love; Yet, when your lawns and silks shall flow, And that white cloud divide Into a doubtful twilight; then, Then will your hidden pride Raise greater fires in men. Ye have been fresh and green, Ye have been fill'd with flowers; And ye the walks have been Where maids have spent their hours. You have beheld how they With wicker arks did come, To kiss and bear away The richer cowslips home. You've heard them sweetly sing, And seen them in a round; Each virgin, like a spring, With honeysuckles crown'd. But now, we see none here, Whose silvery feet did tread And with dishevell'd hair Adorn'd this smoother mead. Like unthrifts, having spent Your stock, and needy grown You're left here to lament Your poor estates alone. Am I despised, because you say; And I dare swear, that I am gray? Know, Lady, you have but your day! And time will come when you shall wear Such frost and snow upon your hair; And when, though long, it comes to pass, You question with your looking-glass, And in that sincere crystal seek But find no rose-bud in your cheek, Nor any bed to give the shew Where such a rare carnation grew:- Ah! then too late, close in your chamber keeping, It will be told That you are old, By those true tears you're weeping. Be not proud, but now incline Your soft ear to discipline; You have changes in your life, Sometimes peace, and sometimes strife; You have ebbs of face and flows, As your health or comes or goes; You have hopes, and doubts, and fears, Numberless as are your hairs; You have pulses that do beat High, and passions less of heat; You are young, but must be old: And, to these, ye must be told, Time, ere long, will come and plow Loathed furrows in your brow: And the dimness of your eye Will no other thing imply, But you must die As well as I. Sweet Amarillis, by a spring's Soft and soul-melting murmurings, Slept; and thus sleeping, thither flew A Robin-red-breast; who at view, Not seeing her at all to stir, Brought leaves and moss to cover her: But while he, perking, there did pry About the arch of either eye, The lid began to let out day, At which poor Robin flew away; And seeing her not dead, but all disleaved, He chirpt for joy, to see himself deceived. No fault in women, to refuse The offer which they most would chuse. No fault: in women, to confess How tedious they are in their dress; No fault in women, to lay on The tincture of vermilion; And there to give the cheek a dye Of white, where Nature doth deny. No fault in women, to make show Of largeness, when they're nothing so; When, true it is, the outside swells With inward buckram, little else. No fault in women, though they be But seldom from suspicion free; No fault in womankind at all, If they but slip, and never fall. About the sweet bag of a bee Two Cupids fell at odds; And whose the pretty prize should be They vow'd to ask the Gods. Which Venus hearing, thither came, And for their boldness stript them; And taking thence from each his flame, With rods of myrtle whipt them. Which done, to still their wanton cries, When quiet grown she'd seen them, She kiss'd and wiped their dove-like eyes, And gave the bag between them. Fly to my mistress, pretty pilfering bee, And say thou bring'st this honey-bag from me; When on her lip thou hast thy sweet dew placed, Mark if her tongue but slyly steal a taste; If so, we live; if not, with mournful hum, Toll forth my death; next, to my burial come. Reach with your whiter hands to me Some crystal of the spring; And I about the cup shall see Fresh lilies flourishing. Or else, sweet nymphs, do you but this To th' glass your lips incline; And I shall see by that one kiss The water turn'd to wine. These springs were maidens once that loved, But lost to that they most approved: My story tells, by Love they were Turn'd to these springs which we see here: The pretty whimpering that they make, When of the banks their leave they take, Tells ye but this, they are the same, In nothing changed but in their name. As is your name, so is your comely face Touch'd every where with such diffused grace, As that in all that admirable round, There is not one least solecism found; And as that part, so every portion else Keeps line for line with beauty's parallels. When I love, as some have told Love I shall, when I am old, O ye Graces! make me fit For the welcoming of it! Clean my rooms, as temples be, To entertain that deity; Give me words wherewith to woo, Suppling and successful too; Winning postures; and withal, Manners each way musical; Sweetness to allay my sour And unsmooth behaviour: For I know you have the skill Vines to prune, though not to kill; And of any wood ye see, You can make a Mercury. I will confess With cheerfulness, Love is a thing so likes me, On me all day, I'll kiss the hand that strikes me. I will not, I, Now blubb'ring cry, It, ah! too late repents me That I did fall To love at all Since love so much contents me. No, no, I'll be In fetters free; While others they sit wringing Their hands for pain, I'll entertain The wounds of love with singing. With flowers and wine, And cakes divine, To strike me I will tempt thee; Which done, no more I'll come before Thee and thine altars empty. I bring ye love. What will love do? Like, and dislike ye. I bring ye love. What will love do? Stroke ye, to strike ye. I bring ye love. What will love do? Love will be-fool ye. I bring ye love. What will love do? Heat ye, to cool ye. I bring ye love. What will love do? Love, gifts will send ye. I bring ye love. What will love do? Stock ye, to spend ye. I bring ye love. What will love do? Love will fulfil ye. I bring ye love. What will love do? Kiss ye, to kill ye. A Gyges ring they bear about them still, To be, and not seen when and where they will; They tread on clouds, and though they sometimes fall, They fall like dew, and make no noise at all: So silently they one to th' other come, As colours steal into the pear or plum, And air-like, leave no pression to be seen Where'er they met, or parting place has been. What is the thing we call a kiss? It is a creature born and bred Between the lips, all cherry-red, By love and warm desires fed, And makes more soft the bridal bed. First to the babies of the eyes, And charms them there with lullabies, And stills the bride, too, when she cries. It frisks and flies, now here, now there: 'Tis now far off, and then 'tis near, And here, and there, and every where. Part your join'd lips, then speaks your kiss; And this Love's sweetest language is. With thousand rare encolourings; And as it flies, it gently sings Love honey yields, but never stings. What needs complaints, When she a place Has with the race Of saints? In endless mirth, She thinks not on What's said or done In earth: She sees no tears, Or any tone Of thy deep groan She hears; Nor does she mind, Or think on't now, That ever thou But changed above, She likes not there, As she did here, Thy love. Forbear, therefore, And lull asleep Thy woes, and weep No more. Orpheus he went, as poets tell, To fetch Eurydice from hell; And had her, but it was upon This short, but strict condition; Backward he should not look, while he Led her through hell's obscurity. But ah! it happen'd, as he made His passage through that dreadful shade, Revolve he did his loving eye, For gentle fear or jealousy; And looking back, that look did sever Him and Eurydice for ever. Ponder my words, if so that any be Known guilty here of incivility; Let what is graceless, discomposed, and rude, With sweetness, smoothness, softness be endued: Teach it to blush, to curtsey, lisp, and show Demure, but yet full of temptation, too. Numbers ne'er tickle, or but lightly please, Unless they have some wanton carriages: This if ye do, each piece will here be good And graceful made by your neat sisterhood. Sea-born goddess, let me be By thy son thus graced, and thee, That whene'er I woo, I find Virgins coy, but not unkind. Let me, when I kiss a maid, Taste her lips, so overlaid With love's sirop, that I may In your temple, when I pray, Kiss the altar, and confess There's in love no bitterness. Whither dost thou hurry me, Bacchus, being full of thee? This way, that way, that way, this, Here and there a fresh Love is; That doth like me, this doth please; Thus a thousand mistresses I have now: yet I alone, Having all, enjoy not one! Bacchus, let me drink no more! Wild are seas that want a shore! When our drinking has no stint, There is no one pleasure in't. I have drank up for to please Thee, that great cup, Hercules. Urge no more; and there shall be Daffadils giv'n up to thee. Play, Phoebus, on thy lute, And we will sit all mute; By listening to thy lyre, That sets all ears on fire. Hark, hark! the God does play! And as he leads the way Through heaven, the very spheres, As men, turn all to ears! Charms, that call down the moon from out her sphere, On this sick youth work your enchantments here! Bind up his senses with your numbers, so As to entrance his pain, or cure his woe. Fall gently, gently, and a-while him keep Lost in the civil wilderness of sleep: That done, then let him, dispossess'd of pain, Like to a slumbering bride, awake again. Music, thou queen of heaven, care-charming spell, That strik'st a stillness into hell; Thou that tam'st tigers, and fierce storms, that rise, With thy soul-melting lullabies; Fall down, down, down, from those thy chiming spheres To charm our souls, as thou enchant'st our ears. The mellow touch of music most doth wound The soul, when it doth rather sigh, than sound. Begin to charm, and as thou strok'st mine ears With thine enchantment, melt me into tears. Then let thy active hand scud o'er thy lyre, And make my spirits frantic with the fire; That done, sink down into a silvery strain, And make me smooth as balm and oil again. Rare is the voice itself: but when we sing To th' lute or viol, then 'tis ravishing. Charm me asleep, and melt me so With thy delicious numbers; That being ravish'd, hence I go Away in easy slumbers. Ease my sick head, And make my bed, Thou Power that canst sever From me this ill; And quickly still, Though thou not kill My fever. Thou sweetly canst convert the same From a consuming fire, Into a gentle-licking flame, And make it thus expire. Then make me weep My pains asleep, And give me such reposes, That I, poor I, May think, thereby, I live and die 'Mongst roses. Fall on me like a silent dew, Or like those maiden showers, Which, by the peep of day, do strew A baptism o'er the flowers. Melt, melt my pains With thy soft strains; That having ease me given, With full delight, I leave this light, And take my flight Lord, thou hast given me a cell, Wherein to dwell; A little house, whose humble roof Is weather proof; Under the spars of which I lie Both soft and dry; Where thou, my chamber for to ward, Hast set a guard Of harmless thoughts, to watch and keep Me, while I sleep. Low is my porch, as is my fate; Both void of state; And yet the threshold of my door Is worn by th' poor, Who thither come, and freely get Good words, or meat. Like as my parlour, so my hall And kitchen's small; A little buttery, and therein A little bin, Which keeps my little loaf of bread Unchipt, unflead; Some brittle sticks of thorn or briar Make me a fire, Close by whose living coal I sit, And glow like it. Lord, I confess too, when I dine, The pulse is thine, And all those other bits that be There placed by thee; The worts, the purslain, and the mess Of water-cress, Which of thy kindness thou hast sent; And my content Makes those, and my beloved beet, To be more sweet. 'Tis thou that crown'st my glittering hearth With guiltless mirth, And giv'st me wassail bowls to drink, Spiced to the brink. Lord, 'tis thy plenty-dropping hand That soils my land, And giv'st me, for my bushel sown, Twice ten for one; Thou mak'st my teeming hen to lay Her egg each day; Besides, my healthful ewes to bear Me twins each year; The while the conduits of my kine Run cream, for wine: All these, and better, thou dost send Me, to this end, That I should render, for my part, A thankful heart; Which, fired with incense, I resign, As wholly thine; But the acceptance, that must be, When with the virgin morning thou dost rise, Crossing thyself come thus to sacrifice; First wash thy heart in innocence; then bring Pure hands, pure habits, pure, pure every thing. Next to the altar humbly kneel, and thence Give up thy soul in clouds of frankincense. Thy golden censers fill'd with odours sweet Shall make thy actions with their ends to meet. In all thy need, be thou possest Still with a well prepared breast; Nor let the shackles make thee sad; Thou canst but have what others had. And this for comfort thou must know, Times that are ill won't still be so: Clouds will not ever pour down rain; A sullen day will clear again. First, peals of thunder we must hear; When lutes and harps shall stroke the ear. First offer incense; then, thy field and meads Shall smile and smell the better by thy beads. The spangling dew dredged o'er the grass shall be Turn'd all to mell and manna there for thee. Butter of amber, cream, and wine, and oil, Shall run as rivers all throughout thy soil. Would'st thou to sincere silver turn thy mould? Pray once, twice pray; and turn thy ground to gold. Along the dark and silent night, With my lantern and my light And the tinkling of my bell, Thus I walk, and this I tell: Death and dreadfulness call on To the general session; To whose dismal bar, we there All accounts must come to clear: Scores of sins we've made here many; Wiped out few, God knows, if any. Rise, ye debtors, then, and fall To make payment, while I call: Ponder this, when I am gone: By the clock 'tis almost One. Time was upon The wing, to fly away; And I call'd on Him but awhile to stay; But he'd be gone, For aught that I could say. He held out then A writing, as he went, And ask'd me, when False man would be content To pay again What God and Nature lent. An hour-glass, In which were sands but few, As he did pass, He shew'd, and told me too Mine end near was; And so away he flew. That flow of gallants which approach To kiss thy hand from out the coach; That fleet of lackeys which do run Before thy swift postilion; Those strong-hoof'd mules, which we behold Rein'd in with purple, pearl, and gold, And shed with silver, prove to be The drawers of the axle-tree; Thy wife, thy children, and the state Of Persian looms and antique plate: All these, and more, shall then afford No joy to thee, their sickly lord. Life is the body's light; which, once declining, Those crimson clouds i' th' cheeks and lips leave shining:- Those counter-changed tabbies in the air, The sun once set, all of one colour are: So, when death comes, fresh tinctures lose their place, And dismal darkness then doth smutch the face. Why, Madam, will ye longer weep, Whenas your baby's lull'd asleep? And, pretty child, feels now no more Those pains it lately felt before. All now is silent; groans are fled; Your child lies still, yet is not dead, But rather like a flower hid here, To spring again another year. Here she lies, a pretty bud, Lately made of flesh and blood; Who as soon fell fast asleep, As her little eyes did peep. Give her strewings, but not stir The earth, that lightly covers her. Here a pretty baby lies Sung asleep with lullabies; Pray be silent, and not stir Th' easy earth that covers her. Virgins promised when I died, That they would each primrose-tide Duly, morn and evening, come, And with flowers dress my tomb. Having promised, pay your debts Maids, and here strew violets. Here a solemn fast we keep, While all beauty lies asleep; Hush'd be all things, no noise here But the toning of a tear; Or a sigh of such as bring Cowslips for her covering. Here she lies, in bed of spice, Fair as Eve in paradise; For her beauty, it was such, Poets could not praise too much. Virgins come, and in a ring Her supremest REQUIEM sing; Then depart, but see ye tread Lightly, lightly o'er the dead. O thou, the wonder of all days! O paragon, and pearl of praise! O Virgin-martyr, ever blest Above the rest Of all the maiden-train! We come, And bring fresh strewings to thy tomb. Thus, thus, and thus, we compass round Thy harmless and unhaunted ground; And as we sing thy dirge, we will The daffadil, And other flowers, lay upon The altar of our love, thy stone. Thou wonder of all maids, liest here, Of daughters all, the dearest dear; The eye of virgins; nay, the queen Of this smooth green, And all sweet meads, from whence we get The primrose and the violet. Too soon, too dear did Jephthah buy, By thy sad loss, our liberty; His was the bond and cov'nant, yet Thou paid'st the debt; Lamented Maid! he won the day: But for the conquest thou didst pay. Thy father brought with him along The olive branch and victor's song; He slew the Ammonites, we know, But to thy woe; And in the purchase of our peace, The cure was worse than the disease. For which obedient zeal of thine, We offer here, before thy shrine, Our sighs for storax, tears for wine; And to make fine And fresh thy hearse-cloth, we will here Four times bestrew thee every year. Receive, for this thy praise, our tears; Receive this offering of our hairs; Receive these crystal vials, fill'd With tears, distill'd From teeming eyes; to these we bring, Each maid, her silver filleting, To gild thy tomb; besides, these cauls, These laces, ribbons, and these falls, These veils, wherewith we use to hide The bashful bride, When we conduct her to her groom; All, all we lay upon thy tomb. No more, no more, since thou art dead, Shall we e'er bring coy brides to bed; No more, at yearly festivals, We, cowslip balls, Or chains of columbines shall make, For this or that occasion's sake. No, no; our maiden pleasures be Wrapt in the winding-sheet with thee; 'Tis we are dead, though not i' th' grave; Or if we have One seed of life left, 'tis to keep A Lent for thee, to fast and weep. Sleep in thy peace, thy bed of spice, And make this place all paradise; May sweets grow here, and smoke from hence Fat frankincense; Let balm and cassia send their scent From out thy maiden-monument. May no wolf howl, or screech owl stir A wing about thy sepulchre! No boisterous winds or storms come hither, To starve or wither Thy soft sweet earth; but, like a spring, Love keep it ever flourishing. May all shy maids, at wonted hours, Come forth to strew thy tomb with flowers; May virgins, when they come to mourn, Male-incense burn Upon thine altar; then return, And leave thee sleeping in thy urn. Come pity us, all ye who see Our harps hung on the willow-tree; Come pity us, ye passers-by, Who see or hear poor widows' cry; Come pity us, and bring your ears And eyes to pity widows' tears. And when you are come hither, Then we will keep A fast, and weep Our eyes out all together, For Tabitha; who dead lies here, Clean wash'd, and laid out for the bier. O modest matrons, weep and wail! For now the corn and wine must fail; The basket and the bin of bread, Wherewith so many souls were fed, Stand empty here for ever; And ah! the poor, At thy worn door, Shall be relieved never. Woe worth the time, woe worth the day, That reft us of thee, Tabitha! For we have lost, with thee, the meal, The bits, the morsels, and the deal Of gentle paste and yielding dough, That thou on widows did bestow. All's gone, and death hath taken Away from us Our maundy; thus Thy widows stand forsaken. Ah, Dorcas, Dorcas! now adieu We bid the cruise and pannier too; Ay, and the flesh, for and the fish, Doled to us in that lordly dish. We take our leaves now of the loom From whence the housewives' cloth did come; The web affords now nothing; Thou being dead, The worsted thread Is cut, that made us clothing. Farewell the flax and reaming wool, With which thy house was plentiful; Farewell the coats, the garments, and The sheets, the rugs, made by thy hand; Farewell thy fire and thy light, That ne'er went out by day or night: No, or thy zeal so speedy, That found a way, By peep of day, To feed and clothe the needy. But ah, alas! the almond-bough And olive-branch is wither'd now; The wine-press now is ta'en from us, The saffron and the calamus; The spice and spikenard hence is gone, The storax and the cinnamon; The carol of our gladness Has taken wing; And our late spring Of mirth is turn'd to sadness. How wise wast thou in all thy ways! How worthy of respect and praise! How matron-like didst thou go drest! How soberly above the rest Of those that prank it with their plumes, And jet it with their choice perfumes! Thy vestures were not flowing; Nor did the street Accuse thy feet Of mincing in their going. And though thou here liest dead, we see A deal of beauty yet in thee. How sweetly shews thy smiling face, Thy lips with all diffused grace! Thy hands, though cold, yet spotless, white, And comely as the chrysolite. Thy belly like a hill is, Or as a neat Clean heap of wheat, All set about with lilies. Sleep with thy beauties here, while we Will shew these garments made by thee; These were the coats; in these are read The monuments of Dorcas dead: These were thy acts, and thou shalt have These hung as honours o'er thy grave: And after us, distressed, Thy very tomb Would cry out, Thou art blessed. First, for effusions due unto the dead, My solemn vows have here accomplished; Next, how I love thee, that my grief must tell, Wherein thou liv'st for ever. Dear, farewell! When I consider, dearest, thou dost stay But here awhile, to languish and decay; Like to these garden glories, which here be The flowery-sweet resemblances of thee: With grief of heart, methinks, I thus do cry, Would thou hadst ne'er been born, or might'st not die! I'll write no more of love, but now repent Of all those times that I in it have spent. I'll write no more of life, but wish 'twas ended, And that my dust was to the earth commended. Give me a cell To dwell, Where no foot hath A path; There will I spend, And end, My wearied years In tears. O earth! earth! earth! hear thou my voice, and be Loving and gentle for to cover me! Banish'd from thee I live; ne'er to return, Unless thou giv'st my small remains an urn. Bell-man of night, if I about shall go For to deny my Master, do thou crow! Thou stop'st Saint Peter in the midst of sin; Stay me, by crowing, ere I do begin; Better it is, premonish'd, for to shun A sin, than fall to weeping when 'tis done. Can I not sin, but thou wilt be My private protonotary? Can I not woo thee, to pass by A short and sweet iniquity? I'll cast a mist and cloud upon My delicate transgression, So utter dark, as that no eye Shall see the hugg'd impiety. Gifts blind the wise, and bribes do please And wind all other witnesses; And wilt not thou with gold be tied, To lay thy pen and ink aside, That in the mirk and tongueless night, Wanton I may, and thou not write? It will not be: And therefore, now, For times to come, I'll make this vow; From aberrations to live free: So I'll not fear the judge, or thee. Open thy gates To him who weeping waits, And might come in, But that held back by sin. Let mercy be So kind, to set me free, And I will straight Come in, or force the gate. In numbers, and but these few, I sing thy birth, oh JESU! Thou pretty Baby, born here, With sup'rabundant scorn here; Who for thy princely port here, Hadst for thy place Of birth, a base Out-stable for thy court here. Instead of neat enclosures Of interwoven osiers; Instead of fragrant posies Of daffadils and roses, Thy cradle, kingly stranger, As gospel tells, Was nothing else, But, here, a homely manger. But we with silks, not cruels, And lily-work will dress thee; And as we dispossess thee Of clouts, we'll make a chamber, Sweet babe, for thee, Of ivory, And plaster'd round with amber. But we will entertain thee With glories to await here, Upon thy princely state here, And more for love than pity: From year to year We'll make thee, here, A free-born of our city. Go, pretty child, and bear this flower Unto thy little Saviour; And tell him, by that bud now blown, He is the Rose of Sharon known. When thou hast said so, stick it there Upon his bib or stomacher; And tell him, for good handsel too, That thou hast brought a whistle new, Made of a clean straight oaten reed, To charm his cries at time of need; Tell him, for coral, thou hast none, But if thou hadst, he should have one; But poor thou art, and known to be Even as moneyless as he. Lastly, if thou canst win a kiss From those melifluous lips of his; Then never take a second on, To spoil the first impression. Here, a little child, I stand, Heaving up my either hand: Cold as paddocks though they be, Here I lift them up to thee, For a benison to fall On our meat, and on us all. In the hour of my distress, When temptations me oppress, And when I my sins confess, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When I lie within my bed, Sick in heart, and sick in head, And with doubts discomforted, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the house doth sigh and weep, And the world is drown'd in sleep, Yet mine eyes the watch do keep, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the artless doctor sees No one hope, but of his fees, And his skill runs on the lees, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When his potion and his pill, Has, or none, or little skill, Meet for nothing but to kill, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the passing-bell doth toll, And the furies in a shoal Come to fright a parting soul, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the tapers now burn blue, And the comforters are few, And that number more than true, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the priest his last hath pray'd, And I nod to what is said, 'Cause my speech is now decay'd, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When, God knows, I'm tost about Either with despair, or doubt; Yet, before the glass be out, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the tempter me pursu'th With the sins of all my youth, And half damns me with untruth, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the flames and hellish cries Fright mine ears, and fright mine eyes, And all terrors me surprise, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the Judgment is reveal'd, And that open'd which was seal'd; When to Thee I have appeal'd, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! Thou bidst me come away, And I'll no longer stay, Than for to shed some tears For faults of former years; And to repent some crimes Done in the present times; And next, to take a bit Of bread, and wine with it; To don my robes of love, Fit for the place above; To gird my loins about With charity throughout; And so to travel hence With feet of innocence; These done, I'll only cry, 'God, mercy!' and so die. Night hath no wings to him that cannot sleep; And Time seems then not for to fly, but creep; Slowly her chariot drives, as if that she Had broke her wheel, or crack'd her axletree. Just so it is with me, who list'ning, pray The winds to blow the tedious night away, That I might see the cheerful peeping day. Sick is my heart; O Saviour! do Thou please To make my bed soft in my sicknesses; Lighten my candle, so that I beneath Sleep not for ever in the vaults of death; Let me thy voice betimes i' th' morning hear; Call, and I'll come; say Thou the when and where: Draw me but first, and after Thee I'll run, And make no one stop till my race be done. O years! and age! farewell: Where I do know Infinity to dwell. And these mine eyes shall see All times, how they Are lost i' th' sea Of vast eternity: Where never moon shall sway The stars; but she, And night, shall be Drown'd in one endless day. In this world, the Isle of Dreams, While we sit by sorrow's streams, Tears and terrors are our themes, But when once from hence we fly, More and more approaching nigh Unto young eternity, In that whiter Island, where Things are evermore sincere: Candour here, and lustre there, There no monstrous fancies shall Out of hell an horror call, To create, or cause at all There, in calm and cooling sleep, We our eyes shall never steep, But eternal watch shall keep, Pleasures such as shall pursue Me immortalized, and you; And fresh joys, as never too Have ending. <|endofpoem|> From the besieged Ardea all in post, Borne by the trustless wings of false desire, Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host, And to Collatium bears the lightless fire Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire And girdle with embracing flames the waist Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste. Haply that name of chaste unhapp'ly set This bateless edge on his keen appetite; When Collatine unwisely did not let To praise the clear unmatched red and white Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight, Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties, With pure aspects did him peculiar duties. For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent, Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state; What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent In the possession of his beauteous mate; Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate, That kings might be espoused to more fame, But king nor peer to such a peerless dame. O happiness enjoy'd but of a few! And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done As is the morning's silver-melting dew Against the golden splendour of the sun! An expir'd date, cancell'd ere well begun: Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms, Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms. Beauty itself doth of itself persuade The eyes of men without an orator; What needeth then apologies be made, To set forth that which is so singular? Or why is Collatine the publisher From thievish ears, because it is his own? Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty Suggested this proud issue of a king; For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be: Perchance that envy of so rich a thing, Braving compare, disdainfully did sting His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt That golden hap which their superiors want. But some untimely thought did instigate His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those; His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state, Neglected all, with swift intent he goes To quench the coal which in his liver glows. O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold, Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old! When at Collatium this false lord arriv'd, Well was he welcom'd by the Roman dame, Within whose face beauty and virtue striv'd Which of them both should underprop her fame: When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame; When beauty boasted blushes, in despite Virtue would stain that or with silver white. But beauty, in that white intituled, From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field: Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red, Which virtue gave the golden age, to gild Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield; Teaching them thus to use it in the fight, When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white. This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen, Argued by beauty's red, and virtue's white: Of either's colour was the other queen, Proving from world's minority their right: Yet their ambition makes them still to fight; The sovereignty of either being so great, That oft they interchange each other's seat. Their silent war of lilies and of roses, Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field, In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses; Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd, The coward captive vanquish'd doth yield To those two armies that would let him go, Rather than triumph in so false a foe. Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue, In that high task hath done her beauty wrong, Which far exceeds his barren skill to show: Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise, In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes. This earthly saint, adored by this devil, Little suspecteth the false worshipper; For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil; Birds never lim'd no secret bushes fear: So guiltless she securely gives good cheer And reverend welcome to her princely guest, Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd: For that he colour'd with his high estate, Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty; That nothing in him seem'd inordinate, Save sometime too much wonder of his eye, Which, having all, all could not satisfy; But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store, That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more. But she, that never cop'd with stranger eyes, Could pick no meaning from their parling looks, Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies Writ in the glassy margents of such books; She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks; Nor could she moralize his wanton sight, More than his eyes were open'd to the light. He stories to her ears her husband's fame, Won in the fields of fruitful Italy; And decks with praises Collatine's high name, Made glorious by his manly chivalry With bruised arms and wreaths of victory: Her joy with heav'd-up hand she doth express, And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success. Far from the purpose of his coming hither, He makes excuses for his being there. No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear; Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear, Upon the world dim darkness doth display, And in her vaulty prison stows the day. For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed, Intending weariness with heavy spright; For, after supper, long he questioned With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night: Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight; And every one to rest themselves betake, Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake. As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining; Yet ever to obtain his will resolving, Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining: Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining; And when great treasure is the meed propos'd, Though death be adjunct, there's no death suppos'd. Those that much covet are with gain so fond, For what they have not, that which they possess They scatter and unloose it from their bond, And so, by hoping more, they have but less; Or, gaining more, the profit of excess Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain, That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain. The aim of all is but to nurse the life With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age; And in this aim there is such thwarting strife, That one for all, or all for one we gage; As life for honour in fell battles' rage; Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost The death of all, and all together lost. So that in vent'ring ill we leave to be The things we are, for that which we expect; And this ambitious foul infirmity, In having much, torments us with defect Of that we have: so then we do neglect The thing we have; and, all for want of wit, Make something nothing, by augmenting it. Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make, Pawning his honour to obtain his lust; And for himself himself he must forsake: Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust? When shall he think to find a stranger just, When he himself himself confounds, betrays To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days? Now stole upon the time the dead of night, When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes: No comfortable star did lend his light, No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries; Now serves the season that they may surprise The silly lambs; pure thoughts are dead and still, While lust and murder wake to stain and kill. And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed, Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm; Is madly toss'd between desire and dread; Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm; But honest Fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm, Doth too too oft betake him to retire, Beaten away by brain-sick rude Desire. His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth, That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly; Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth, Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye; And to the flame thus speaks advisedly: 'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire, So Lucrece must I force to my desire.' Here pale with fear he doth premeditate The dangers of his loathsome enterprise, And in his inward mind he doth debate What following sorrow may on this arise; Then looking scornfully, he doth despise His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust, And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust: 'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not To darken her whose light excelleth thine: And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot With your uncleanness that which is divine! Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine: Let fair humanity abhor the deed That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed. 'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms! O foul dishonour to my household's grave! O impious act, including all foul harms! A martial man to be soft fancy's slave! True valour still a true respect should have; Then my digression is so vile, so base, That it will live engraven in my face. 'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive, And be an eye-sore in my golden coat; Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive, To cipher me how fondly I did dote; That my posterity, sham'd with the note, Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin To wish that I their father had not been. 'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek? A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy: Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week? Or sells eternity to get a toy? For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy? Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown, Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down? 'If Collatinus dream of my intent, Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent? This siege that hath engirt his marriage, This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage, This dying virtue, this surviving shame, Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame? 'O, what excuse can my invention make When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed? Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake? Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed? The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed; And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly, But, coward-like, with trembling terror die. 'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire, Or lain in ambush to betray my life, Or were he not my dear friend, this desire Might have excuse to work upon his wife; As in revenge or quittal of such strife: But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend, The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end. 'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known: Hateful it is: there is no hate in loving; I'll beg her love; but she is not her own; The worst is but denial and reproving: My will is strong, past reason's weak removing. Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.' Thus, graceless, holds he disputation 'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will, And with good thoughts makes dispensation, Urging the worser sense for vantage still; Which in a moment doth confound and kill All pure effects, and doth so far proceed, That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed. Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand, And gaz'd for tidings in my eager eyes, Fearing some hard news from the warlike band, Where her beloved Collatinus lies. O how her fear did make her colour rise! First red as roses that on lawn we lay, Then white as lawn, the roses took away. 'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd, Forc'd it to tremble with her loyal fear; Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd, Until her husband's welfare she did hear; Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer, That had Narcissus seen her as she stood, Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood. 'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses? Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses; Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth: Affection is my captain, and he leadeth; And when his gaudy banner is display'd, The coward fights and will not be dismay'd. 'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die! Respect and reason wait on wrinkled age! My heart shall never countermand mine eye; Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage; My part is youth, and beats these from the stage: Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize; Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?' As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear Is almost chok'd by unresisted lust. Away he steals with opening, listening ear, Full of foul hope, and full of fond mistrust; Both which, as servitors to the unjust, So cross him with their opposite persuasion, That now he vows a league, and now invasion. Within his thought her heavenly image sits, And in the self-same seat sits Collatine: That eye which looks on her confounds his wits; That eye which him beholds, as more divine, Unto a view so false will not incline; But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart, Which once corrupted takes the worser part; And therein heartens up his servile powers, Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show, Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours; And as their captain, so their pride doth grow. Paying more slavish tribute than they owe. By reprobate desire thus madly led, The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed. The locks between her chamber and his will, Each one by him enforc'd retires his ward; But, as they open they all rate his ill, Which drives the creeping thief to some regard, The threshold grates the door to have him heard; Night-wand'ring weasels shriek to see him there; They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear. As each unwilling portal yields him way, Through little vents and crannies of the place The wind wars with his torch, to make him stay, And blows the smoke of it into his face, Extinguishing his conduct in this case; But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch, Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch: And being lighted, by the light he spies Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks; He takes it from the rushes where it lies, And griping it, the neeld his finger pricks: As who should say this glove to wanton tricks Is not inur'd: return again in haste; Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste. But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him; He in the worst sense construes their denial: The doors, the wind, the glove that did delay him, He takes for accidental things of trial; Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial, Who with a lingering stay his course doth let, Till every minute pays the hour his debt. 'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time, Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring. To add a more rejoicing to the prime, And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing. Pain pays the income of each precious thing; Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands, The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.' Now is he come unto the chamber door, That shuts him from the heaven of his thought, Which with a yielding latch, and with no more, Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing he sought. So from himself impiety hath wrought, That for his prey to pray he doth begin, As if the heavens should countenance his sin. But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer, Having solicited the eternal power, That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair, And they would stand auspicious to the hour, Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must de-flower; The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact, How can they then assist me in the act? 'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide! My will is back'd with resolution: Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried, The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution; Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution. The eye of heaven is out, and misty night Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.' This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch, And with his knee the door he opens wide: The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch; Thus treason works ere traitors be espied. Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside; But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing, Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting. Into the chamber wickedly he stalks, And gazeth on her yet unstained bed. The curtains being close, about he walks, Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head: By their high treason is his heart misled; Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon. Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun, Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight; Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun To wink, being blinded with a greater light: Whether it is that she reflects so bright, That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed; But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed. O, had they in that darksome prison died, Then had they seen the period of their ill! Then Collatine again by Lucrece' side In his clear bed might have reposed still: But they must ope, this blessed league to kill; And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight. Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under, Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss; Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder, Swelling on either side to want his bliss; Between whose hills her head entombed is: Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies, To be admir'd of lewd unhallow'd eyes. Without the bed her other fair hand was, On the green coverlet; whose perfect white Show'd like an April daisy on the grass, With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night, Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheath'd their light, And canopied in darkness sweetly lay, Till they might open to adorn the day. Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath; O modest wantons! wanton modesty! Showing life's triumph in the map of death, And death's dim look in life's mortality: Each in her sleep themselves so beautify, As if between them twain there were no strife, But that life liv'd in death, and death in life. Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue, A pair of maiden worlds unconquered, Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew, And him by oath they truly honoured. These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred: Who, like a foul usurper, went about From this fair throne to heave the owner out. What could he see but mightily he noted? What did he note but strongly he desir'd? What he beheld, on that he firmly doted, And in his will his wilful eye he tir'd. With more than admiration he admir'd Her azure veins, her alabaster skin, Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin. As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey, Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied, So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay, His rage of lust by grazing qualified; Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side, His eye, which late this mutiny restrains, Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins: And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting, Obdurate vassals. fell exploits effecting, In bloody death and ravishment delighting, Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting, Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting: Anon his beating heart, alarum striking, Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking. His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye, His eye commends the leading to his hand; His hand, as proud of such a dignity, Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand On her bare breast, the heart of all her land; Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale, Left their round turrets destitute and pale. They, mustering to the quiet cabinet Where their dear governess and lady lies, Do tell her she is dreadfully beset, And fright her with confusion of their cries: She, much amaz'd, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes, Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold, Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd. Imagine her as one in dead of night From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking, That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite, Whose grim aspect sets every joint a shaking: What terror 'tis! but she, in worser taking, From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view The sight which makes supposed terror true. Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears, Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies; She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes: Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries: Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights, In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights. His hand, that yet remains upon her breast, Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall! May feel her heart, poor citizen, distress'd, Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall, Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal. This moves in him more rage, and lesser pity, To make the breach, and enter this sweet city. First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin To sound a parley to his heartless foe, Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin, The reason of this rash alarm to know, But she with vehement prayers urgeth still Under what colour he commits this ill. Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face, That even for anger makes the lily pale, And the red rose blush at her own disgrace Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale: Under that colour am I come to scale Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine, For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine. 'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide: Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night, Where thou with patience must my will abide, My will that marks thee for my earth's delight, Which I to conquer sought with all my might; But as reproof and reason beat it dead, By thy bright beauty was it newly bred. 'I see what crosses my attempt will bring; I know what thorns the growing rose defends; I think the honey guarded with a sting; All this, beforehand, counsel comprehends: But will is deaf, and hears no heedful friends; Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty, And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty. 'I have debated, even in my soul, What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed; But nothing can Affection's course control, Or stop the headlong fury of his speed. I know repentant tears ensue the deed, Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity; Yet strike I to embrace mine infamy.' This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade, Which, like a falcon towering in the skies, Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade, Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies: So under his insulting falchion lies Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells. 'Lucrece,' quoth he, 'this night I must enjoy thee: If thou deny, then force must work my way, For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee; That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay. To kill thine honour with thy life's decay; And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him, Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him. 'So thy surviving husband shall remain The scornful mark of every open eye; Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain, And thou, the author of their obloquy, Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes, And sung by children in succeeding times. 'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend: The fault unknown is as a thought unacted; A little harm, done to a great good end, For lawful policy remains enacted. The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted In a pure compound; being so applied, His venom in effect is purified. 'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake, Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot The shame that from them no device can take, The blemish that will never be forgot; Worse than a slavish wipe, or birth-hour's blot: For marks descried in men's nativity Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.' Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye He rouseth up himself and makes a pause; While she, the picture of pure piety, Like a white hind under the grype's sharp claws, Pleads in a wilderness where are no laws, To the rough beast that knows no gentle right, Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite. But when a black-fac'd cloud the world doth threat, In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding, From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get, Which blows these pitchy vapours from their biding, Hindering their present fall by this dividing; So his unhallow'd haste her words delays, And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays. Yet, foul night-working cat, he doth but dally, While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth; Her sad behaviour feeds his vulture folly, A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth: His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth No penetrable entrance to her plaining: Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining. Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd In the remorseless wrinkles of his face; Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd, Which to her oratory adds more grace. She puts the period often from his place, And midst the sentence so her accent breaks, That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks. She conjures him by high almighty Jove, By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath, By her untimely tears, her husband's love, By holy human law, and common troth, By heaven and earth, and all the power of both, That to his borrow'd bed he make retire, And stoop to honour, not to foul desire. Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality With such black payment as thou hast pretended; Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee; Mar not the thing that cannot be amended; End thy ill aim before the shoot be ended: He is no woodman that doth bend his bow To strike a poor unseasonable doe. 'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me; Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me; Myself a weakling, do not then ensnare me; Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me; My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee. If ever man were mov'd with woman's moans, Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans: 'All which together, like a troubled ocean, Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart; To soften it with their continual motion; For stones dissolv'd to water do convert. O, if no harder than a stone thou art, Melt at my tears, and be compassionate! Soft pity enters at an iron gate. 'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee; Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame? To all the host of heaven I complain me, Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name. Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same, Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king; For kings like gods should govern every thing. 'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age, When thus thy vices bud before thy spring! If in thy hope thou dar'st do such outrage, What dar'st thou not when once thou art a king! O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing From vassal actors can he wip'd away; Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay. 'This deed will make thee only lov'd for fear, But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love: With foul offenders thou perforce must bear, When they in thee the like offences prove: If but for fear of this, thy will remove; For princes are the glass, the school, the book, Where subjects eyes do learn, do read, do look. 'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn? Must he in thee read lectures of such shame: Wilt thou be glass, wherein it shall discern Authority for sin, warrant for blame, To privilege dishonour in thy name? Thou back'st reproach against long-living laud, And mak'st fair reputation but a bawd. 'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee, From a pure heart command thy rebel will: Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity, For it was lent thee all that brood to kill. Thy princely office how canst thou fulfill, When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul Sin may say He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way? 'Think but how vile a spectacle it were To view thy present trespass in another. Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear; Their own transgressions partially they smother: This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother. O how are they wrapp'd in with infamies That from their own misdeeds askaunce their eyes! 'To thee, to thee, my heav'd-up hands appeal, Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier; I sue for exil'd majesty's repeal; Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire: His true respect will 'prison false desire, And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne, That thou shalt see thy state, and pity mine.' 'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide Turns not, but swells the higher by this let. Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide, And with the wind in greater fury fret: The petty streams that pay a daily debt To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste, Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.' 'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king; And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning, Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood. If all these petty ills shall change thy good, Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hears'd, And not the puddle in thy sea dispers'd. 'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave; Thou nobly base, they basely dignified; Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave; Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride: The lesser thing should not the greater hide; The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot, But low shrubs whither at the cedar's root. 'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state' 'No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee: Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate, Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee; That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee Unto the base bed of some rascal groom, To be thy partner in this shameful doom.' This said, he sets his foot upon the light, For light and lust are deadly enemies; Shame folded up in blind concealing night, When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize. The wolf hath seiz'd his prey, the poor lamb cries; Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold: For with the nightly linen that she wears He pens her piteous clamours in her head; Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed. O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed! The spots whereof could weeping purify, Her tears should drop on them perpetually. But she hath lost a dearer thing than life, And he hath won what he would lose again. This forced league doth force a further strife; This momentary joy breeds months of pain, This hot desire converts to cold disdain: Pure Chastity is rifled of her store, And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before. Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk, Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight, Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk The prey wherein by nature they delight; So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night: His taste delicious, in digestion souring, Devours his will, that liv'd by foul devouring. O deeper sin than bottomless conceit Can comprehend in still imagination! Drunken desire must vomit his receipt, Ere he can see his own abomination. While lust is in his pride no exclamation Can curb his heat, or rein his rash desire, Till, like a jade, self-will himself doth tire. And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek, With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace, Feeble desire, all recreant, poor, and meek, Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case: The flesh being proud, desire doth fight with Grace, For there it revels; and when that decays, The guilty rebel for remission prays. So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome, Who this accomplishment so hotly chas'd; For now against himself he sounds this doom, That through the length of times he stands disgrac'd: Besides, his soul's fair temple is defac'd; To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares, To ask the spotted princess how she fares. She says, her subjects with foul insurrection Have batter'd down her consecrated wall, And by their mortal fault brought in subjection Her immortality, and made her thrall To living death, and pain perpetual; Which in her prescience she controlled still, But her foresight could not forestall their will. Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth, A captive victor that hath lost in gain; Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth, The scar that will, despite of cure, remain; Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain. She hears the load of lust he left behind, And he the burthen of a guilty mind. He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence; She like a wearied lamb lies panting there; He scowls, and hates himself for his offence; She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear; He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear; She stays, exclaiming on the direful night; He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loath'd delight. He thence departs a heavy convertite; She there remains a hopeless castaway: He in his speed looks for the morning light; She prays she never may behold the day; 'For day,' quoth she, 'night's scapes doth open lay; And my true eyes have never practis'd how To cloak offences with a cunning brow. 'They think not but that every eye can see The same disgrace which they themselves behold; And therefore would they still in darkness be, To have their unseen sin remain untold; For they their guilt with weeping will unfold, And grave, like water that doth eat in steel, Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.' Here she exclaims against repose and rest, And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind. She wakes her heart by beating on her breast, And bids it leap from thence, where it may find Some purer chest, to close so pure a mind. Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite Against the unseen secrecy of night: 'O comfort-killing night, image of hell! Dim register and notary of shame! Black stage for tragedies and murders fell! Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame! Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame! Grim cave of death, whispering conspirator With close-tongued treason and the ravisher! 'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy night! Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime, Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light, Make war against proportion'd course of time! Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed, Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head. 'With rotten damps ravish the morning air; Let their exhal'd unwholesome breaths make sick The life of purity, the supreme fair, Ere he arrive his weary noontide prick; And let thy misty vapours march so thick, That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light May set at noon and make perpetual night. 'Were Tarquin night as he is but night's child , The silver-shining queen he would distain; Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defil'd, Through Night's black bosom should not peep again: So should I have co-partners in my pain: And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage, As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage. 'Where now I have no one to blush with me, To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine, To mask their brows, and hide their infamy; But I alone alone must sit and pine, Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine, Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans, Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans. 'O night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, Let not the jealous day behold that face Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak Immodesty lies martyr'd with disgrace! Keep still possession of thy gloomy place, That all the faults which in thy reign are made, May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade! 'Make me not object to the tell-tale day! The light will show, character'd in my brow, The story of sweet chastity's decay, The impious breach of holy wedlock vow: Yea, the illiterate, that know not how To cipher what is writ in learned books, Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks. 'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; The orator, to deck his oratory, Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame: Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame, Will tie the hearers to attend each line, How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 'Let my good name, that senseless reputation, For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted: If that be made a theme for disputation, The branches of another root are rotted, And undeserved reproach to him allotted, That is as clear from this attaint of mine As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine. 'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace! O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar! Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face, And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar, How he in peace is wounded, not in war. Alas, how many bear such shameful blows, Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows! 'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, From me by strong assault it is bereft. My honey lost, and I, a drone-like bee, Have no perfection of my summer left, But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft: In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept, And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept. 'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack; Yet for thy honour did I entertain him; Coming from thee, I could not put him back, For it had been dishonour to disdain him: Besides, of weariness he did complain him, And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil, When virtue is profan'd in such a devil! 'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud? Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud? Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts? Or kings be breakers of their own behests? But no perfection is so absolute, That some impurity doth not pollute. 'The aged man that coffers up his gold Is plagued with cramps, and gouts, and painful fits; And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold, But like still-pining Tantalus he sits, And useless barns the harvest of his wits; Having no other pleasure of his gain But torment that it cannot cure his pain. 'So then he hath it when he cannot use it, And leaves it to be master'd by his young; Who in their pride do presently abuse it: Their father was too weak, and they too strong, To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long. The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours, Even in the moment that we call them ours. 'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers; The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing; What virtue breeds iniquity devours: We have no good that we can say is ours, But ill-annexed Opportunity Or kills his life or else his quality. 'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great: 'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason; Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get; Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season; 'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason; And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him, Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him. 'Thou mak'st the vestal violate her oath; Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd; Thou smother'st honesty, thou murther'st troth; Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd! Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud: Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief, Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief! 'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame, Thy private feasting to a public fast; Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name, Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste: Thy violent vanities can never last. How comes it then, vile Opportunity, Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee? 'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend, And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd? When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd? Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd? The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee; But they ne'er meet with Opportunity. 'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds; Justice is feasting while the widow weeps; Advice is sporting while infection breeds; Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds: Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages. 'When truth and virtue have to do with thee, A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid; They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee, He gratis comes; and thou art well appay'd As well to hear as grant what he hath said. My Collatine would else have come to me When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee. 'Guilty thou art of murder and of theft; Guilty of perjury and subornation; Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift; Guilty of incest, that abomination: An accessory by thine inclination To all sins past, and all that are to come, From the creation to the general doom. 'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly night, Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care, Eater of youth, false slave to false delight, Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare; Thou nursest all and murtherest all that are: O hear me then, injurious, shifting Time! Be guilty of my death, since of my crime. 'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity, Betray'd the hours thou gav'st me to repose? Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me To endless date of never-ending woes? Time's office is to fine the hate of foes; To eat up errors by opinion bred, Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed. 'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, To unmask falsehood, and bring truth to light, To stamp the seal of time in aged things, To wake the morn, and sentinel the night, To wrong the wronger till he render right; To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, And smear with dust their glittering golden towers: 'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments, To feed oblivion with decay of things, To blot old books and alter their contents, To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs; To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel, And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel; 'To show the beldame daughters of her daughter, To make the child a man, the man a child, To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter, To tame the unicorn and lion wild, To mock the subtle, in themselves beguil'd; To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops, And waste huge stones with little water-drops. 'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage, Unless thou couldst return to make amends? One poor retiring minute in an age Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends, Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back, I could prevent this storm, and shun thy wrack! 'Thou cease!ess lackey to eternity, With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight: Devise extremes beyond extremity, To make him curse this cursed crimeful night: Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright; And the dire thought of his committed evil Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil. 'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans; Let there bechance him pitiful mischances, To make him moan; but pity not his moans: Stone him with harden'd hearts, harder than stones; And let mild women to him lose their mildness, Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness. 'Let him have time to tear his curled hair, Let him have time against himself to rave, Let him have time of Time's help to despair, Let him have time to live a loathed slave, Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave; And time to see one that by alms doth live Disdain to him disdained scraps to give. 'Let him have time to see his friends his foes, And merry fools to mock at him resort; Let him have time to mark how slow time goes In time of sorrow, and how swift and short His time of folly and his time of sport: And ever let his unrecalling crime Have time to wail the abusing of his time. 'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad, Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill! At his own shadow let the thief run mad! Himself himself seek every hour to kill! Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill: For who so base would such an office have As slanderous deathsman to so base a slave? The baser is he, coming from a king, To shame his hope with deeds degenerate. The mightier man, the mightier is the thing That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate; For greatest scandal waits on greatest state. The moon being clouded presently is miss'd, But little stars may hide them when they list. 'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, And unperceived fly with the filth away; But if the like the snow-white swan desire, The stain upon his silver down will stay. Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day: Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, But eagles gazed upon with every eye. 'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools! Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators! Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools; Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; To trembling clients be you mediators: For me, I force not argument a straw, Since that my case is past the help of law. 'In vain I rail at Opportunity, At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful night; In vain I cavil with mine infamy, In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite: This helpless smoke of words doth me no right. The remedy indeed to do me good Is to let forth my foul-defil'd blood. 'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree? Honour thyself to rid me of this shame; For if I die, my honour lives in thee; But if I live, thou livest in my defame: Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, And wast afear'd to scratch her wicked foe, Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.' This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth, To find some desperate instrument of death: But this no slaughter-house no tool imparteth, To make more vent for passage of her breath; Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth As smoke from Aetna, that in air consumes, Or that which from discharged cannon fumes. 'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain Some happy mean to end a hapless life. I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain, Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife: But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife: So am I now: O no, that cannot be; Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me. 'O! that is gone for which I sought to live, And therefore now I need not fear to die. To clear this spot by death, at least I give A badge of fame to slander's livery; A dying life to living infamy; Poor helpless help, the treasure stolen away, To burn the guiltless casket where it lay! 'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know The stained taste of violated troth; I will not wrong thy true affection so, To flatter thee with an infringed oath; He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute That thou art doting father of his fruit. Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought, Nor laugh with his companions at thy state; But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought Basely with gold, but stolen from forth thy gate. For me, I am the mistress of my fate, And with my trespass never will dispense, Till life to death acquit my forced offence. 'I will not poison thee with my attaint, Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses; My sable ground of sin I will not paint, To hide the truth of this false night's abuses; My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices, As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale, Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.' By this; lamenting Philomel had ended The well-tun'd warble of her nightly sorrow, And solemn night with slow-sad gait descended To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow: But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, And therefore still in night would cloister'd be. Revealing day through every cranny spies, And seems to point her out where she sits weeping, To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes, Why pryest thou through my window? leave thy peeping; Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping: Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light, For day hath nought to do what's done by night.' Thus cavils she with every thing she sees: True grief is fond and testy as a child, Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees. Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild; Continuance tames the one: the other wild, Like an unpractis'd swimmer plunging still With too much labour drowns for want of skill. So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care, Holds disputation with each thing she views, And to herself all sorrow doth compare; No object but her passion's strength renews; And as one shifts, another straight ensues: Sometime 'tis mad, and too much talk affords. The little birds that tune their morning's joy Make her moans mad with their sweet melody. For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; Sad souls are slain in merry company: Grief best is pleas'd with grief's society: True sorrow then is feelingly suffic'd When with like semblance it is sympathiz'd. 'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; He ten times pines that pines beholding food; To see the salve doth make the wound ache more; Great grief grieves most at that would do it good; Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood; Who, being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows; Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows. 'You mocking birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts, My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests: Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears; Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears. 'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment, Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair: As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment, So I at each sad strain will strain a tear, And with deep groans the diapason bear: For burthen-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still, While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill. 'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part, To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I, To imitate thee well, against my heart Will fix a sharp knife, to affright mine eye; Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. These means, as frets upon an instrument, Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment. 'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day, As shaming any eye should thee behold, Some dark deep desert, seated from the way, That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold, Will we find out; and there we will unfold To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds: Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.' As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, Wildly determining which way to fly, Or one encompass'd with a winding maze, That cannot tread the way out readily; So with herself is she in mutiny, To live or die which of the twain were better, When life is sham'd, and Death reproach's debtor. 'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack! what were it, But with my body my poor soul's pollution? They that lose half with greater patience bear it Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion. That mother tries a merciless conclusion Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one, Will slay the other, and be nurse to none. 'My body or my soul, which was the dearer, When the one pure, the other made divine? Whose love of either to myself was nearer? When both were kept for heaven and Collatine? Ah, me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine, His leaves will wither, and his sap decay; So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away. 'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted, Her mansion batter'd by the enemy; Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted, Grossly engirt with daring infamy: Then let it not be call'd impiety, If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole Through which I may convey this troubled soul. 'Yet die I will not till my Collatine Have heard the cause of my untimely death; That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, Revenge on him that made me stop my breath. My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath, Which by him tainted shall for him be spent, And as his due writ in my testament. 'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife That wounds my body so dishonoured. 'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life; The one will live, the other being dead: So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred; For in my death I murther shameful scorn: My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born. What legacy shall I bequeath to thee? My resolution, Love, shall be thy boast, By whose example thou reveng'd mayst be. How Tarquin must be used, read it in me: Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe, And, for my sake, serve thou false Tarquin so. 'This brief abridgement of my will I make: My soul and body to the skies and ground; My resolution, husband, do thou take; Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound; My shame be his that did my fame confound; And all my fame that lives disburs'd be To those that live, and think no shame of me. 'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will; How was I overseen that thou shalt see it! My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill; My life's foul deed my life's fair end shall free it. Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say so be it: Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee; Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.' This plot of death when sadly she had laid, And wip'd the brinish pearl from her bright eyes, With untun'd tongue she hoarsely call'd her maid, Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies; For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies. Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow. Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow, With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty, And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow, For why her face wore sorrow's livery, But durst not ask of her audaciously Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe. But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set, Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye; Even so the maid with swelling drops 'gan wet Her circled eyne, enforc'd by sympathy Of those fair suns, set in her mistress' sky, Who in a salt-wav'd ocean quench their light, Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night. A pretty while these pretty creatures stand, Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling: One justly weeps; the other takes in hand No cause, but company, of her drops spilling: Their gentle sex to weep are often willing: Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts, And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts. For men have marble, women waxen minds, And therefore are they form'd as marble will; The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill: Then call them not the authors of their ill, No more than wax shall be accounted evil, Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil. Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain, Lays open all the little worms that creep; In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep: Through crystal walls each little mote will peep: Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks, Poor women's faces are their own faults' books. No man inveigb against the wither'd flower, But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd! Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour, Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd With men's abuses! those proud lords, to blame, Make weak-made women tenants to their shame. The precedent whereof in Lucrece view, Assail'd by night with circumstances strong Of present death, and shame that might ensue By that her death, to do her husband wrong: Such danger to resistance did belong; The dying fear through all her body spread; And who cannot abuse a body dead? By this, mild Patience bid fair Lucrece speak To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are raining? If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining, Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood: If tears could help, mine own would do me good. 'But tell me, girl, when went' and there she stay'd Till after a deep groan 'Tarquin from, hence?' 'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid, 'The more to blame my sluggard negligence: Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense; Myself was stirring ere the break of day, And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away. 'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold, She would request to know your heaviness.' 'O peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told, The repetition cannot make it less; For more it is than I can well express: And that deep torture may be call'd a hell, When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen Yet save that labour, for I have them here. What should I say? One of my husband's men Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear A letter to my lord, my love, my dear; Bid him with speed prepare to carry it; The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.' Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write, First hovering o'er the paper with her quill: Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; What wit sets down is blotted straight with will; This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill: Much like a press of people at a door, Throng her inventions, which shall go before. At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee, Health to thy person! next vouchsafe to afford If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see Some present speed to come and visit me: So, I commend me from our house in grief: My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.' Here folds she up the tenor of her woe, Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly. By this short schedule Collatine may know Her grief, but not her grief's true quality; She dares not thereof make discovery, Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse, Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse. Besides, the life and feeling of her passion She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her; When sighs, and groans, and tears may grace the fashion Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her From that suspicion which the world my might bear her. To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter With words, till action might become them better. To see sad sights moves more than hear them told; For then the eye interprets to the ear The heavy motion that it doth behold, When every part a part of woe doth bear. 'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords, And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words. Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ 'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste;' The post attends, and she delivers it, Charging the sour-fac'd groom to hie as fast As lagging fowls before the northern blast. Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems: Extremely still urgeth such extremes. The homely villain court'sies to her low; And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye Receives the scroll, without or yea or no, And forth with bashful innocence doth hie. But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie Imagine every eye beholds their blame; For Lucrece thought he blush'd to see her shame: When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect Of spirit, life, and bold audacity. Such harmless creatures have a true respect To talk in deeds, while others saucily Promise more speed, but do it leisurely: Even so this pattern of the worn-out age Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage. His kindled duty kindled her mistrust, That two red fires in both their faces blaz'd; She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust, And, blushing with him, wistly on him gaz'd; Her earnest eye did make him more amaz'd: The more saw the blood his cheeks replenish, The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. But long she thinks till he return again, And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone. The weary time she cannot entertain, For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, to groan: So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, That she her plaints a little while doth stay, Pausing for means to mourn some newer way. At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy; Before the which is drawn the power of Greece, For Helen's rape the city to destroy, Threat'ning cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy; Which the conceited painter drew so proud, As heaven it seem'd to kiss the turrets bow'd. A thousand lamentable objects there, In scorn of Nature, Art gave lifeless life: Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear, Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife: The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife; The dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights, Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights. There might you see the labouring pioner Begrim'd with sweat, and smeared all with dust; And from the towers of Troy there would appear The very eyes of men through loopholes thrust, Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust: Such sweet observance in this work was had, That one might see those far-off eyes look sad. In great commanders grace and majesty You might behold, triumphing in their faces; In youth, quick bearing and dexterity; And here and there the painter interlaces Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces; Which heartless peasants did so well resemble, That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble. In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art Of physiognomy might one behold! The face of either 'cipher'd either's heart; Their face their manners most expressly told: In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigour roll'd; But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent Show'd deep regard and smiling government. There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand, As't were encouraging the Greeks to fight; Making such sober action with his hand That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight: In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white, Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky. About him were a press of gaping faces, Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice; All jointly listening, but with several graces, As if some mermaid did their ears entice; Some high, some low, the painter was so nice: The scalps of many, almost hid behind, To jump up higher seem'd to mock the mind. Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head, His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear; Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red; Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear; And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words, It seem'd they would debate with angry swords. For much imaginary work was there; Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind, That for Achilles' image stood his spear, Grip'd in an armed hand; himself, behind, Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind: A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head, Stood for the whole to be imagined, And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field, Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield; And to their hope they such odd action yield, That through their light joy seemed to appear, Like bright things stain'd a kind of heavy fear, And, from the strond of Dardan, where they fought, To Simois' reedy banks, the red blood ran, Whose waves to imitate the battle sought With swelling ridges; and their ranks began To break upon the galled shore, and than Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks, They join, and shoot their foam at Simois' banks. To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come, To find a face where all distress is stell'd. Many she sees where cares have carved some, But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd, Till she despairing Hecuba beheld, Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes, Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. In her the painter had anatomiz'd Time's ruin, beauty's wrack, and grim care's reign: Her cheeks with chops and wrinkles were disguis'd; Of what she was no semblance did remain: Her blue blood, chang'd to black in every vein, Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed, Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead. On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes, And shapes her sorrow to the beldame's woes, Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, And bitter words to ban her cruel foes: The painter was no god to lend her those; And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong, To give her so much grief, and not a tongue. 'Poor instrument,' quoth she, 'without a sound, I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue; And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound, And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong, And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long; And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies. 'Show me the strumpet that began this stir, That with my nails her beauty I may tear. Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear; Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here: And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye, The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die. 'Why should the private pleasure of some one Become the public plague of many mo? Let sin, alone committed, light alone Upon his head that hath transgressed so. Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe: For one's offence why should so many fall, To plague a private sin in general? 'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies, Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds; Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies, And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds, And one man's lust these many lives confounds: Had doting Priam check'd his son's desire, Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.' Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes: For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell, Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; Then little strength rings out the doleful knell: So Lucrece set a-work sad tales doth tell To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow; She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow. She throws her eyes about the painting round, And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament: At last she sees a wretched image bound, That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent: His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content; Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes. In him the painter labour'd with his skill To hide deceit, and give the harmless show An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still, A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe; Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so That blushing red no guilty instance gave, Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have. But, like a constant and confirmed devil, He entertain'd a show so seeming just, And therein so ensconc'd his secret evil, That jealousy itself cold not mistrust False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust Into so bright a day such black-fac'd storms, Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew For perjur'd Sinon, whose enchanting story The credulous Old Priam after slew; Whose words, like wildfire, burnt the shining glory Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, And little stars shot from their fixed places, When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces. This picture she advisedly perus'd, And chid the painter for his wondrous skill; Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abus'd; So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill: And still on him she gaz'd; and gazing still, Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied, That she concludes the picture was belied. 'It cannot be,' quoth she, 'that so much guile' She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;' But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while, And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took; 'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook, And turn'd it thus: 'It cannot be, I find, But such a face should bear a wicked mind: 'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted, So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild, As if with grief or travail he had fainted, To me came Tarquin armed; so beguil'd With outward honesty, but yet defil'd With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish, So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish. 'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes, To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds. Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise? For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds; His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds; Those round clear pearls of his that move thy pity, Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell; For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold, And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell; These contraries such unity do hold, Only to flatter fools, and make them bold; So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter, That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.' Here, all enrag'd, such passion her assails, That patience is quite beaten from her breast. She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, Comparing him to that unhappy guest Whose deed hath made herself herself detest; At last she smilingly with this gives o'er; 'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.' Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, And time doth weary time with her complaining. She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow, And both she thinks too long with her remaining: Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining. Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps; And they that watch see time how slow it creeps. Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought, That she with painted images hath spent; Being from the feeling of her own grief brought By deep surmise of others' detriment: Losing her woes in shows of discontent. It easeth some, though none it ever cur'd, To think their dolour others have endur'd. But now the mindful messenger, come back, Brings home his lord and other company; Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black: And round about her tear-distained eye Blue circles stream'd, like rainbows in the sky. These water-galls in her dim element Foretell new storms to those already spent. Which when her sad-beholding husband saw, Amazedly in her sad face he stares: Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw, Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares. He hath no power to ask her how she fares, Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance, Met far from home, wondering each other's chance. At last he takes her by the bloodless hand, And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent? Why art thou thus attir'd in discontent? Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness, And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.' Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, Ere once she can discharge one word of woe: At length address'd to answer his desire, She modestly prepares to let them know Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe; While Collatine and his consorted lords With sad attention long to hear her words. And now this pale swan in her watery nest Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending: 'Few words,' quoth she, 'shall fit the trespass best, Where no excuse can give the fault amending: In me more woes than words are now depending; And my laments would be drawn out too long, To tell them all with one poor tired tongue. 'Then be this all the task it hath to say: Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed A stranger came, and on that pillow lay Where thou wast wont to rest thy weary head; And what wrong else may be imagined By foul enforcement might be done to me, From that, alas! thy Lucrece is not free. 'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight, With shining falchion in my chamber came A creeping creature, with a flaming light, And softly cried Awake, thou Roman dame, And entertain my love; else lasting shame On thee and thine this night I will inflict, If thou my love's desire do contradict. 'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine, quoth he, Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will, I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee And swear I found you where you did fulfil The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill The lechers in their deed: this act will be My fame and thy perpetual infamy. 'With this, I did begin to start and cry, And then against my heart he sets his sword, Swearing, unless I took all patiently, I should not live to speak another word; So should my shame still rest upon record, And never be forgot in mighty Rome The adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom. 'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak, And far the weaker with so strong a fear: My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak; No rightful plea might plead for justice there: His scarlet lust came evidence to swear That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes; And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies. 'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse! Or at the least this refuge let me find; Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse, Immaculate and spotless is my mind; That was not forc'd; that never was inclin'd To accessary yieldings, but still pure Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.' Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss, With head declin'd, and voice damm'd up with woe, With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across, From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow The grief away that stops his answer so: But wretched as he is he strives in vain; What he breathes out his breath drinks up again. As through an arch the violent roaring tide Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste; Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride Back to the strait that forc'd him on so fast; In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past: Even so his sighs, his sorrows make a saw. To push grief on, and back the same grief draw. Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh: 'Dear Lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth Another power; no flood by raining slaketh. My woe too sensible thy passion maketh More feeling-painful: let it then suffice To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes. 'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so, For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me; Be suddenly revenged on my foe, Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die; For sparing justice feeds iniquity. 'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she, Speaking to those that came with Collatine 'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me, With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine; For 'tis a meritorious fair design To chase injustice with revengeful arms: Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.' At this request, with noble disposition Each present lord began to promise aid, As bound in knighthood to her imposition, Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd. But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, The protestation stops. 'O, speak,' quoth she, 'How may this forced stain be wip'd from me? 'What is the quality of mine offence, Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance? May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, My low-declined honour to advance? May any terms acquit me from this chance? The poison'd fountain clears itself again; And why not I from this compelled stain? With this, they all at once began to say, Her body's stain her mind untainted clears; While with a joyless smile she turns away The face, that map which deep impression bears Of hard misfortune, carv'd in it with tears. 'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living, By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving. Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break, She throws forth Tarquin's name: 'He, he,' she says, But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak; Till after many accents and delays, Untimely breathings, sick and short assays, She utters this: 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he, That guides this hand to give this wound to me.' Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheath'd: That blow did bail it from the deep unrest Of that polluted prison where it breath'd: Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny. Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed, Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew; Till Lucrece' father that beholds her bleed, Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw; And from the purple fountain Brutus drew The murderous knife, and, as it left the place, Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase; And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood Circles her body in on every side, Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood Bare and unpeopled, in this fearful flood. Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd, And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd. About the mourning and congealed face Of that black blood a watery rigol goes, Which seems to weep upon the tainted place: And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes, Corrupted blood some watery token shows; And blood untainted still doth red abide, Blushing at that which is so putrified. 'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries, 'That life was mine which thou hast here depriv'd. If in the child the father's image lies, Where shall I live now Lucrece is unliv'd? Thou wast not to this end from me deriv'd If children pre-decease progenitors, We are their offspring, and they none of ours. 'Poor broken glass, I often did behold In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; But now that fair fresh mirror, dim and old, Shows me a bare-bon'd death by time outworn; O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn! And shiver'd all the beauty of my glass, That I no more can see what once I was! 'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer, If they surcease to be that should survive. Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger, And leave the faltering feeble souls alive? The old bees die, the young possess their hive: Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again, and see Thy father die, and not thy father thee!' By this starts Collatine as from a dream, And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place; And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face, And counterfeits to die with her a space; Till manly shame bids him possess his breath, And live, to be revenged on her death. The deep vexation of his inward soul Who, mad that sorrow should his use control, Or keep him from heart-easing words so long, Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, That no man could distinguish what he said. Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain, But through his teeth, as if the name he tore. This windy tempest, till it blow up rain, Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er: Then son and father weep with equal strife, Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife. The one doth call her his, the other his, Yet neither may possess the claim they lay, The father says 'She's mine,' 'O, mine she is,' Replies her husband: 'do not take away My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say He weeps for her, for she was only mine, And only must be wail'd by Collatine.' 'O,' quoth Lucretius, 'I did give that life Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.' 'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife, I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.' 'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd The dispers'd air, who, holding Lucrece' life, Answer'd their cries, 'My daughter!' and 'My wife!' Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side, Seeing such emulation in their woe, Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show. He with the Romans was esteemed so For sportive words, and uttering foolish things: But now he throws that shallow habit by, Wherein deep policy did him disguise; And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly, To check the tears in Collatinus' eyes. 'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth he, 'arise; Let my unsounded self, suppos'd a fool, Now set thy long-experienc'd wit to school. 'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe? Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds? Is it revenge to give thyself a blow, For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds: Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so, To slay herself, that should have slain her foe. 'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart In such relenting dew of lamentations, But kneel with me, and help to bear thy part, To rouse our Roman gods with invocations, That they will suffer these abominations, Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgrac'd, By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chas'd. 'Now, by the Capitol that we adore, And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd, By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store, By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd, And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife, We will revenge the death of this true wife.' This said, he struck his hand upon his breast, And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow; And to his protestation urg'd the rest, Who, wondering at him, did his words allow; Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow; And that deep vow, which Brutus made before, He doth again repeat, and that they swore. When they had sworn to this advised doom, They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence; To show her bleeding body thorough Rome, And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence: Which being done with speedy diligence, The Romans plausibly did give consent To Tarquin's everlasting banishment. <|endofpoem|> From the besieged Ardea all in post, Borne by the trustless wings of false desire, Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host, And to Collatium bears the lightless fire Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire And girdle with embracing flames the waist Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste. Haply that name of 'chaste' unhappily set This bateless edge on his keen appetite; When Collatine unwisely did not let To praise the clear unmatched red and white Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight, Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties, With pure aspects did him peculiar duties. For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent, Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state; What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent In the possession of his beauteous mate; Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate, That kings might be espoused to more fame, But king nor peer to such a peerless dame. O happiness enjoy'd but of a few! And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done As is the morning's silver-melting dew Against the golden splendour of the sun! An expired date, cancell'd ere well begun: Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms, Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms. Beauty itself doth of itself persuade The eyes of men without an orator; What needeth then apologies be made, To set forth that which is so singular? Or why is Collatine the publisher From thievish ears, because it is his own? Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty Suggested this proud issue of a king; For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be: Perchance that envy of so rich a thing, Braving compare, disdainfully did sting His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt That golden hap which their superiors want. But some untimely thought did instigate His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those; His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state, Neglected all, with swift intent he goes To quench the coal which in his liver glows. O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold, Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old! When at Collatium this false lord arrived, Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame, Within whose face beauty and virtue strived Which of them both should underprop her fame: When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame When beauty boasted blushes, in despite Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white. But beauty, in that white intituled, From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field: Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red, Which virtue gave the golden age to gild Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield; Teaching them thus to use it in the fight, When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white. This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen, Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white: Of either's colour was the other queen, Proving from world's minority their right: Yet their ambition makes them still to fight; The sovereignty of either being so great, That oft they interchange each other's seat. Their silent war of lilies and of roses, Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field, In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses; Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd, The coward captive vanquished doth yield To those two armies that would let him go, Rather than triumph in so false a foe. Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue, In that high task hath done her beauty wrong, Which far exceeds his barren skill to show: Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise, In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes. This earthly saint, adored by this devil, Little suspecteth the false worshipper; For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil; Birds never limed no secret bushes fear: So guiltless she securely gives good cheer And reverend welcome to her princely guest, Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd: For that he colour'd with his high estate, Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty; That nothing in him seem'd inordinate, Save sometime too much wonder of his eye, Which, having all, all could not satisfy; But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store, That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more. But she, that never coped with stranger eyes, Could pick no meaning from their parling looks, Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies Writ in the glassy margents of such books: She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks; Nor could she moralize his wanton sight, More than his eyes were open'd to the light. He stories to her ears her husband's fame, Won in the fields of fruitful Italy; And decks with praises Collatine's high name, Made glorious by his manly chivalry With bruised arms and wreaths of victory: Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express, And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success. Far from the purpose of his coming hither, He makes excuses for his being there: No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear; Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear, Upon the world dim darkness doth display, And in her vaulty prison stows the Day. For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed, Intending weariness with heavy spright; For, after supper, long he questioned With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night: Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight; And every one to rest themselves betake, Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake. As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining; Yet ever to obtain his will resolving, Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining: Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining; And when great treasure is the meed proposed, Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed. Those that much covet are with gain so fond, For what they have not, that which they possess They scatter and unloose it from their bond, And so, by hoping more, they have but less; Or, gaining more, the profit of excess Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain, That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain. The aim of all is but to nurse the life With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age; And in this aim there is such thwarting strife, That one for all, or all for one we gage; As life for honour in fell battle's rage; Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost The death of all, and all together lost. So that in venturing ill we leave to be The things we are for that which we expect; And this ambitious foul infirmity, In having much, torments us with defect Of that we have: so then we do neglect The thing we have; and, all for want of wit, Make something nothing by augmenting it. Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make, Pawning his honour to obtain his lust; And for himself himself he must forsake: Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust? When shall he think to find a stranger just, When he himself himself confounds, betrays To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days? Now stole upon the time the dead of night, When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes: No comfortable star did lend his light, No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries; Now serves the season that they may surprise The silly lambs: pure thoughts are dead and still, While lust and murder wake to stain and kill. And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed, Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm; Is madly toss'd between desire and dread; Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm; But honest fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm, Doth too too oft betake him to retire, Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire. His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth, That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly; Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth, Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye; And to the flame thus speaks advisedly, 'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire, So Lucrece must I force to my desire.' Here pale with fear he doth premeditate The dangers of his loathsome enterprise, And in his inward mind he doth debate What following sorrow may on this arise: Then looking scornfully, he doth despise His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust, And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust: 'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not To darken her whose light excelleth thine: And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot With your uncleanness that which is divine; Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine: Let fair humanity abhor the deed That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed. 'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms! O foul dishonour to my household's grave! O impious act, including all foul harms! A martial man to be soft fancy's slave! True valour still a true respect should have; Then my digression is so vile, so base, That it will live engraven in my face. 'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive, And be an eye-sore in my golden coat; Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive, To cipher me how fondly I did dote; That my posterity, shamed with the note, Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin To wish that I their father had not been. 'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek? A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy. Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week? Or sells eternity to 'get a toy? For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy? Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown, Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down? 'If Collatinus dream of my intent, Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent? This siege that hath engirt his marriage, This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage, This dying virtue, this surviving shame, Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame? 'O, what excuse can my invention make, When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed? Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake, Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed? The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed; And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly, But coward-like with trembling terror die. 'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire, Or lain in ambush to betray my life, Or were he not my dear friend, this desire Might have excuse to work upon his wife, As in revenge or quittal of such strife: But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend, The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end. 'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known: Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving: I'll beg her love; but she is not her own: The worst is but denial and reproving: My will is strong, past reason's weak removing. Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.' Thus, graceless, holds he disputation 'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will, And with good thoughts makes dispensation, Urging the worser sense for vantage still; Which in a moment doth confound and kill All pure effects, and doth so far proceed, That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed. Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand, And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes, Fearing some hard news from the warlike band, Where her beloved Collatinus lies. O, how her fear did make her colour rise! First red as roses that on lawn we lay, Then white as lawn, the roses took away. 'And how her hand; in my hand being lock'd, Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear! Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd, Until her husband's welfare she did hear; Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer, That had Narcissus seen her as she stood, Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood. 'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses? Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses; Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth: Affection is my captain, and he leadeth; And when his gaudy banner is display'd, The coward fights and will not be dismay'd. 'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die! Respect and reason, wait on wrinkled age! My heart shall never countermand mine eye: Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage; My part is youth, and beats these from the stage: Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize; Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?' As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear Is almost choked by unresisted lust. Away he steals with open listening ear, Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust; Both which, as servitors to the unjust, So cross him with their opposite persuasion, That now he vows a league, and now invasion. Within his thought her heavenly image sits, And in the self-same seat sits Collatine: That eye which locks on her confounds his wits; That eye which him beholds, as more divine, Unto a view so false will not incline; But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart, Which once corrupted takes the worser part; And therein heartens up his servile powers, Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show, Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours; And as their captain, so their pride doth grow. Paying more slavish tribute than they owe. By reprobate desire thus madly led, The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed. The locks between her chamber and his will, Each one by him enforced retires his ward; But, as they open, they all rate his ill, Which drives the creeping thief to some regard: The threshold grates the door to have him heard; Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there; They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear. As each unwilling portal yields him way, Through little vents and crannies of the place The wind wars with his torch to make him stay, And blows the smoke of it into his face, Extinguishing his conduct in this case; But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch, Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch: And being lighted, by the light he spies Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks: He takes it from the rushes where it lies, And griping it, the needle his finger pricks; As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks Is not inured: return again in haste; Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.' But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him; He in the worst sense construes their denial: The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him, He takes for accidental things of trial; Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial, Who with a lingering stay his course doth let, Till every minute pays the hour his debt. 'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time, Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring. To add a more rejoicing to the prime, And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing. Pain pays the income of each precious thing; Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands, The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.' Now is he come unto the chamber door, That shuts him from the heaven of his thought, Which with a yielding latch, and with no more, Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing he sought. So from himself impiety hath wrought, That for his prey to pray he doth begin, As if the heavens should countenance his sin. But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer, Having solicited th' eternal power That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair And they would stand auspicious to the hour, Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must de-flower: The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact, How can they then assist me in the act? 'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide! My will is back'd with resolution: Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried; The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution; Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution. The eye of heaven is out, and misty night Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.' This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch, And with his knee the door he opens wide. The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch: Thus treason works ere traitors be espied. Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside; But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing, Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting. Into the chamber wickedly he stalks, And gazeth on her yet unstained bed. The curtains being close, about he walks, Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head: By their high treason is his heart misled; Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon. Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun, Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight; Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun To wink, being blinded with a greater light: Whether it is that she reflects so bright, That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed; But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed. O, had they in that darksome prison died! Then had they seen the period of their ill; Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side, In his clear bed might have reposed still: But they must ope, this blessed league to kill; And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight. Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under, Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss; Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder, Swelling on either side to want his bliss; Between whose hills her head entombed is: Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies, To be admired of lewd unhallow'd eyes. Without the bed her other fair hand was, On the green coverlet; whose perfect white Show'd like an April daisy on the grass, With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night, Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light, And canopied in darkness sweetly lay, Till they might open to adorn the day. Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath; O modest wantons! wanton modesty! Showing life's triumph in the map of death, And death's dim look in life's mortality: Each in her sleep themselves so beautify, As if between them twain there were no strife, But that life lived in death, and death in life. Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue, A pair of maiden worlds unconquered, Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew, And him by oath they truly honoured. These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred; Who, like a foul usurper, went about From this fair throne to heave the owner out. What could he see but mightily he noted? What did he note but strongly he desired? What he beheld, on that he firmly doted, And in his will his wilful eye he tired. With more than admiration he admired Her azure veins, her alabaster skin, Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin. As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey, Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied, So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay, His rage of lust by grazing qualified; Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side, His eye, which late this mutiny restrains, Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins: And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting, Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting, In bloody death and ravishment delighting, Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting, Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting: Anon his beating heart, alarum striking, Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking. His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye, His eye commends the leading to his hand; His hand, as proud of such a dignity, Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand On her bare breast, the heart of all her land; Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale, Left their round turrets destitute and pale. They, mustering to the quiet cabinet Where their dear governess and lady lies, Do tell her she is dreadfully beset, And fright her with confusion of their cries: She, much amazed, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes, Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold, Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd. Imagine her as one in dead of night From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking, That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite, Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking: What terror 'tis! but she, in worser taking, From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view The sight which makes supposed terror true. Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears, Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies; She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes: Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries; Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights, In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights. His hand, that yet remains upon her breast, Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall! May feel her heart poor citizen! distress'd, Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall, Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal. This moves in him more rage and lesser pity, To make the breach and enter this sweet city. First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin To sound a parley to his heartless foe; Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin. The reason of this rash alarm to know, But she with vehement prayers urgeth still Under what colour he commits this ill. Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face, That even for anger makes the lily pale, And the red rose blush at her own disgrace, Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale: Under that colour am I come to scale Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine, For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine. 'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide: Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night, Where thou with patience must my will abide; My will that marks thee for my earth's delight, Which I to conquer sought with all my might; But as reproof and reason beat it dead, By thy bright beauty was it newly bred. 'I see what crosses my attempt will bring; I know what thorns the growing rose defends; I think the honey guarded with a sting; All this beforehand counsel comprehends: But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends; Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty, And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty. 'I have debated, even in my soul, What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed; But nothing can affection's course control, Or stop the headlong fury of his speed. I know repentant tears ensue the deed, Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity; Yet strike I to embrace mine infamy.' This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade, Which, like a falcon towering in the skies, Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade, Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies: So under his insulting falchion lies Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells. 'Lucrece,' quoth he, 'this night I must enjoy thee: If thou deny, then force must work my way, For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee: That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay. To kill thine honour with thy life's decay; And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him, Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him. 'So thy surviving husband shall remain The scornful mark of every open eye; Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain, And thou, the author of their obloquy, Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes, And sung by children in succeeding times. 'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend: The fault unknown is as a thought unacted; A little harm done to a great good end For lawful policy remains enacted. The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted In a pure compound; being so applied, His venom in effect is purified. 'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake, Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot The shame that from them no device can take, The blemish that will never be forgot; Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot: For marks descried in men's nativity Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.' Here with a cockatrice's dead-killing eye He rouseth up himself and makes a pause; While she, the picture of pure piety, Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws, Pleads, in a wilderness where are no laws, To the rough beast that knows no gentle right, Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite. But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat, In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding, From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get, Which blows these pitchy vapours from their biding, Hindering their present fall by this dividing; So his unhallow'd haste her words delays, And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays. Yet, foul night-working cat, he doth but dally, While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth: Her sad behaviour feeds his vulture folly, A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth: His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth No penetrable entrance to her plaining: Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining. Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fixed In the remorseless wrinkles of his face; Her modest eloquence with sighs is mixed, Which to her oratory adds more grace. She puts the period often from his place; And midst the sentence so her accent breaks, That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks. She conjures him by high almighty Jove, By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath, By her untimely tears, her husband's love, By holy human law, and common troth, By heaven and earth, and all the power of both, That to his borrow'd bed he make retire, And stoop to honour, not to foul desire. Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality With such black payment as thou hast pretended; Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee; Mar not the thing that cannot be amended; End thy ill aim before the shoot be ended; He is no woodman that doth bend his bow To strike a poor unseasonable doe. 'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me: Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me: Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me: Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me. My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee: If ever man were moved with woman's moans, Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans: 'All which together, like a troubled ocean, Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart, To soften it with their continual motion; For stones dissolved to water do convert. O, if no harder than a stone thou art, Melt at my tears, and be compassionate! Soft pity enters at an iron gate. 'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee: Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame? To all the host of heaven I complain me, Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name. Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same, Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king; For kings like gods should govern every thing. 'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age, When thus thy vices bud before thy spring! If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage, What darest thou not when once thou art a king? O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing From vassal actors can he wiped away; Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay. 'This deed will make thee only loved for fear; But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love: With foul offenders thou perforce must bear, When they in thee the like offences prove: If but for fear of this, thy will remove; For princes are the glass, the school, the book, Where subjects eyes do learn, do read, do look. 'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn? Must he in thee read lectures of such shame? Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern Authority for sin, warrant for blame, To privilege dishonour in thy name? Thou back'st reproach against long-living laud, And makest fair reputation but a bawd. 'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee, From a pure heart command thy rebel will: Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity, For it was lent thee all that brood to kill. Thy princely office how canst thou fulfill, When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul sin may say He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way? 'Think but how vile a spectacle it were, To view thy present trespass in another. Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear; Their own transgressions partially they smother: This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother. O, how are they wrapp'd in with infamies That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes! 'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal, Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier: I sue for exiled majesty's repeal; Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire: His true respect will prison false desire, And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne, That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.' 'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide Turns not, but swells the higher by this let. Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide, And with the wind in greater fury fret: The petty streams that pay a daily debt To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.' 'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king; And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning, Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood. If all these petty ills shall change thy good, Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed, And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed. 'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave; Thou nobly base, they basely dignified; Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave: Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride: The lesser thing should not the greater hide; The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot, But low shrubs whither at the cedar's root. 'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state' 'No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee: Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate, Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee; That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee Unto the base bed of some rascal groom, To be thy partner in this shameful doom.' This said, he sets his foot upon the light, For light and lust are deadly enemies: Shame folded up in blind concealing night, When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize. The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries; Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold: For with the nightly linen that she wears He pens her piteous clamours in her head; Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed. O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed! The spots whereof could weeping purify, Her tears should drop on them perpetually. But she hath lost a dearer thing than life, And he hath won what he would lose again: This forced league doth force a further strife; This momentary joy breeds months of pain; This hot desire converts to cold disdain: Pure Chastity is rifled of her store, And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before. Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk, Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight, Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk The prey wherein by nature they delight; So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night: His taste delicious, in digestion souring, Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring. O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit Can comprehend in still imagination! Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt, Ere he can see his own abomination. While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire, Till like a jade Self-will himself doth tire. And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek, With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace, Feebly Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek, Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case: The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace, For there it revels; and when that decays, The guilty rebel for remission prays. So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome, Who this accomplishment so hotly chased; For now against himself he sounds this doom, That through the length of times he stands disgraced: Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced; To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares, To ask the spotted princess how she fares. She says, her subjects with foul insurrection Have batter'd down her consecrated wall, And by their mortal fault brought in subjection Her immortality, and made her thrall To living death and pain perpetual: Which in her prescience she controlled still, But her foresight could not forestall their will. Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth, A captive victor that hath lost in gain; Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth, The scar that will, despite of cure, remain; Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain. She hears the load of lust he left behind, And he the burden of a guilty mind. He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence; She like a wearied lamb lies panting there; He scowls and hates himself for his offence; She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear; He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear; She stays, exclaiming on the direful night; He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loathed delight. He thence departs a heavy convertite; She there remains a hopeless castaway; He in his speed looks for the morning light; She prays she never may behold the day, 'For day,' quoth she, 'night's scapes doth open lay, And my true eyes have never practised how To cloak offences with a cunning brow. 'They think not but that every eye can see The same disgrace which they themselves behold; And therefore would they still in darkness be, To have their unseen sin remain untold; For they their guilt with weeping will unfold, And grave, like water that doth eat in steel, Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.' Here she exclaims against repose and rest, And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind. She wakes her heart by beating on her breast, And bids it leap from thence, where it may find Some purer chest to close so pure a mind. Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite Against the unseen secrecy of night: 'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell! Dim register and notary of shame! Black stage for tragedies and murders fell! Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame! Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame! Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator With close-tongued treason and the ravisher! 'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night! Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime, Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light, Make war against proportion'd course of time; Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed, Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head. 'With rotten damps ravish the morning air; Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick The life of purity, the supreme fair, Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick; And let thy misty vapours march so thick, That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light May set at noon and make perpetual night. 'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child, The silver-shining queen he would distain; Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled, Through Night's black bosom should not peep again: So should I have co-partners in my pain; And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage, As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage. 'Where now I have no one to blush with me, To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine, To mask their brows and hide their infamy; But I alone alone must sit and pine, Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine, Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans, Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans. 'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, Let not the jealous Day behold that face Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak Immodesty lies martyr'd with disgrace! Keep still possession of thy gloomy place, That all the faults which in thy reign are made May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade! 'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day! The light will show, character'd in my brow, The story of sweet chastity's decay, The impious breach of holy wedlock vow: Yea, the illiterate, that know not how To cipher what is writ in learned books, Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks. 'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; The orator, to deck his oratory, Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame; Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame, Will tie the hearers to attend each line, How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine. 'Let my good name, that senseless reputation, For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted: If that be made a theme for disputation, The branches of another root are rotted And undeserved reproach to him allotted That is as clear from this attaint of mine As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine. 'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace! O unfelt sore crest-wounding, private scar! Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face, And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar, How he in peace is wounded, not in war. Alas, how many bear such shameful blows, Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows! 'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, From me by strong assault it is bereft. My honey lost, and I, a drone-like bee, Have no perfection of my summer left, But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft: In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept, And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept. 'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack; Yet for thy honour did I entertain him; Coming from thee, I could not put him back, For it had been dishonour to disdain him: Besides, of weariness he did complain him, And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil, When virtue is profaned in such a devil! 'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud? Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud? Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts? Or kings be breakers of their own behests? But no perfection is so absolute, That some impurity doth not pollute. 'The aged man that coffers-up his gold Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits; And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold, But like still-pining Tantalus he sits, And useless barns the harvest of his wits; Having no other pleasure of his gain But torment that it cannot cure his pain. 'So then he hath it when he cannot use it, And leaves it to be master'd by his young; Who in their pride do presently abuse it: Their father was too weak, and they too strong, To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long. The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours Even in the moment that we call them ours. 'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers; The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing; What virtue breeds iniquity devours: We have no good that we can say is ours, But ill-annexed Opportunity Or kills his life or else his quality. 'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great! 'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason: Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get; Whoever plots the sin, thou point'st the season; 'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason; And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him, Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him. 'Thou makest the vestal violate her oath; Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd; Thou smother'st honesty, thou murder'st troth; Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd! Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud: Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief, Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief! 'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame, Thy private feasting to a public fast, Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name, Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste: Thy violent vanities can never last. How comes it then, vile Opportunity, Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee? 'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend, And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd? When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd? Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd? The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee; But they ne'er meet with Opportunity. 'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds; Justice is feasting while the widow weeps; Advice is sporting while infection breeds: Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds: Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages. 'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee, A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid: They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee, He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid As well to hear as grant what he hath said. My Collatine would else have come to me When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee. 'Guilty thou art of murder and of theft, Guilty of perjury and subornation, Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift, Guilty of incest, that abomination; An accessory by thine inclination To all sins past, and all that are to come, From the creation to the general doom. 'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night, Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care, Eater of youth, false slave to false delight, Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare; Thou nursest all and murder'st all that are: O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time! Be guilty of my death, since of my crime. 'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity, Betray'd the hours thou gavest me to repose, Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me To endless date of never-ending woes? Time's office is to fine the hate of foes; To eat up errors by opinion bred, Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed. 'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light, To stamp the seal of time in aged things, To wake the morn and sentinel the night, To wrong the wronger till he render right; To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours, And smear with dust their glittering golden towers; 'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments, To feed oblivion with decay of things, To blot old books and alter their contents, To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs, To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel, And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel; 'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter, To make the child a man, the man a child, To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter, To tame the unicorn and lion wild, To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled, To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops, And waste huge stones with little waterdrops. 'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage, Unless thou couldst return to make amends? One poor retiring minute in an age Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends, Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends: O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back, I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack! 'Thou cease!ess lackey to eternity, With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight: Devise extremes beyond extremity, To make him curse this cursed crimeful night: Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright; And the dire thought of his committed evil Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil. 'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans: Let there bechance him pitiful mischances, To make him moan; but pity not his moans: Stone him with harden'd hearts, harder than stones; And let mild women to him lose their mildness, Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness. 'Let him have time to tear his curled hair, Let him have time against himself to rave, Let him have time of Time's help to despair, Let him have time to live a loathed slave, Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave, And time to see one that by alms doth live Disdain to him disdained scraps to give. 'Let him have time to see his friends his foes, And merry fools to mock at him resort; Let him have time to mark how slow time goes In time of sorrow, and how swift and short His time of folly and his time of sport; And ever let his unrecalling crime Have time to wail th' abusing of his time. 'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad, Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill! At his own shadow let the thief run mad, Himself himself seek every hour to kill! Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill; For who so base would such an office have As slanderous deathsman to so base a slave? The baser is he, coming from a king, To shame his hope with deeds degenerate: The mightier man, the mightier is the thing That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate; For greatest scandal waits on greatest state. The moon being clouded presently is miss'd, But little stars may hide them when they list. 'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire, And unperceived fly with the filth away; But if the like the snow-white swan desire, The stain upon his silver down will stay. Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day: Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, But eagles gazed upon with every eye. 'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools! Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators! Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools; Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; To trembling clients be you mediators: For me, I force not argument a straw, Since that my case is past the help of law. 'In vain I rail at Opportunity, At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night; In vain I cavil with mine infamy, In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite: This helpless smoke of words doth me no right. The remedy indeed to do me good Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood. 'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree? Honour thyself to rid me of this shame; For if I die, my honour lives in thee; But if I live, thou livest in my defame: Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame, And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe, Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.' This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth, To find some desperate instrument of death: But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth To make more vent for passage of her breath; Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth As smoke from Aetna, that in air consumes, Or that which from discharged cannon fumes. 'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain Some happy mean to end a hapless life. I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain, Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife: But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife: So am I now: O no, that cannot be; Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me. 'O, that is gone for which I sought to live, And therefore now I need not fear to die. To clear this spot by death, at least I give A badge of fame to slander's livery; A dying life to living infamy: Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away, To burn the guiltless casket where it lay! 'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt know The stained taste of violated troth; I will not wrong thy true affection so, To flatter thee with an infringed oath; He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute That thou art doting father of his fruit. Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought, Nor laugh with his companions at thy state; But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate. For me, I am the mistress of my fate, And with my trespass never will dispense, Till life to death acquit my forced offence. 'I will not poison thee with my attaint, Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses; My sable ground of sin I will not paint, To hide the truth of this false night's abuses: My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices, As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale, Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.' By this; lamenting Philomel had ended The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow, And solemn night with slow sad gait descended To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow: But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, And therefore still in night would cloister'd be. Revealing day through every cranny spies, And seems to point her out where she sits weeping; To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes, Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping: Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light, For day hath nought to do what's done by night.' Thus cavils she with every thing she sees: True grief is fond and testy as a child, Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees: Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild; Continuance tames the one: the other wild, Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still, With too much labour drowns for want of skill. So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care, Holds disputation with each thing she views, And to herself all sorrow doth compare; No object but her passion's strength renews; And as one shifts, another straight ensues: Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords. The little birds that tune their morning's joy Make her moans mad with their sweet melody: For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; Sad souls are slain in merry company; Grief best is pleased with grief's society: True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed When with like semblance it is sympathized. 'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; He ten times pines that pines beholding food; To see the salve doth make the wound ache more; Great grief grieves most at that would do it good; Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood; Who, being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows; Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows. 'You mocking birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts, My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests: Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears; Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears. 'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment, Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair: As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment, So I at each sad strain will strain a tear, And with deep groans the diapason bear; For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still, While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill. 'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part, To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I, To imitate thee well, against my heart Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye; Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. These means, as frets upon an instrument, Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment. 'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day, As shaming any eye should thee behold, Some dark deep desert, seated room the way, That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold, Will we find out; and there we will unfold To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds: Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.' As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, Wildly determining which way to fly, Or one encompass'd with a winding maze, That cannot tread the way out readily; So with herself is she in mutiny, To live or die which of the twain were better, When life is shamed, and death reproach's debtor. 'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it, But with my body my poor soul's pollution? They that lose half with greater patience bear it Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion. That mother tries a merciless conclusion Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one, Will slay the other and be nurse to none. 'My body or my soul, which was the dearer, When the one pure, the other made divine? Whose love of either to myself was nearer, When both were kept for heaven and Collatine? Ay me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine, His leaves will wither and his sap decay; So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away. 'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted, Her mansion batter'd by the enemy; Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted, Grossly engirt with daring infamy: Then let it not be call'd impiety, If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole Through which I may convey this troubled soul. 'Yet die I will not till my Collatine Have heard the cause of my untimely death; That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, Revenge on him that made me stop my breath. My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath, Which by him tainted shall for him be spent, And as his due writ in my testament. 'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife That wounds my body so dishonoured. 'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life; The one will live, the other being dead: So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred; For in my death I murder shameful scorn: My shame so dead, mine honour is newborn. What legacy shall I bequeath to thee? My resolution, love, shall be thy boast, By whose example thou revenged mayst be. How Tarquin must be used, read it in me: Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe, And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so. 'This brief abridgement of my will I make: My soul and body to the skies and ground; My resolution, husband, do thou take; Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound; My shame be his that did my fame confound; And all my fame that lives disbursed be To those that live, and think no shame of me. 'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will; How was I overseen that thou shalt see it! My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill; My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it. Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say So be it: Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee: Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.' This plot of death when sadly she had laid, And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes, With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies; For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies. Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow. Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow, With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty, And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow, For why her face wore sorrow's livery; But durst not ask of her audaciously Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe. But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set, Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye; Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky, Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light, Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night. A pretty while these pretty creatures stand, Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling: One justly weeps; the other takes in hand No cause, but company, of her drops spilling: Their gentle sex to weep are often willing; Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts, And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts. For men have marble, women waxen, minds, And therefore are they form'd as marble will; The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill: Then call them not the authors of their ill, No more than wax shall be accounted evil Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil. Their smoothness, like a goodly campaign plain, Lays open all the little worms that creep; In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep: Through crystal walls each little mote will peep: Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks, Poor women's faces are their own faults' books. No man inveigb against the wither'd flower, But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd: Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour, Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd With men's abuses: those proud lords, to blame, Make weak-made women tenants to their shame. The precedent whereof in Lucrece view, Assail'd by night with circumstances strong Of present death, and shame that might ensue By that her death, to do her husband wrong: Such danger to resistance did belong; The dying fear through all her body spread; And who cannot abuse a body dead? By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak To the poor counterfeit of her complaining: 'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are raining? If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining, Know gentle wench, it small avails my mood: If tears could help, mine own would do me good. 'But tell me, girl, when went' and there she stay'd Till after a deep groan 'Tarquin from, hence?' 'Madam, ere I was up.' replied the maid, 'The more to blame my sluggard negligence: Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense; Myself was stirring ere the break of day, And ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away. 'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold, She would request to know your heaviness.' 'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told, The repetition cannot make it less; For more it is than I can well express: And that deep torture may be call'd a hell When more is felt than one hath power to tell. 'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen: Yet save that labour, for I have them here. What should I say? One of my husband's men Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear A letter to my lord, my love, my dear: Bid him with speed prepare to carry it; The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.' Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write, First hovering o'er the paper with her quill: Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; What wit sets down is blotted straight with will; This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill: Much like a press of people at a door, Throng her inventions, which shall go before. At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee, Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t' afford Of ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see Some present speed to come and visit me. So, I commend me from our house in grief: My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.' Here folds she up the tenour of her woe, Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly. By this short schedule Collatine may know Her grief, but not her grief's true quality: She dares not thereof make discovery, Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse, Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse. Besides, the life and feeling of her passion She hoards to spend when he is by to hear her: When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her From that suspicion which the world my might bear her. To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter With words, till action might become them better. To see sad sights moves more than hear them told: For then the eye interprets to the ear The heavy motion that it doth behold, When every part a part of woe doth bear. 'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords, And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words. Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ 'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.' The post attends, and she delivers it, Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast As lagging fowls before the northern blast: Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems: Extremely still urgeth such extremes. The homely villain court'sies to her low; And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye Receives the scroll without or yea or no And forth with bashful innocence doth hie. But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie Imagine every eye beholds their blame, For Lucrece thought he blush'd to see her shame: When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect Of spirit, life, and bold audacity. Such harmless creatures have a true respect To talk in deeds, while others saucily Promise more speed, but do it leisurely: Even so this pattern of the worn-out age Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage. His kindled duty kindled her mistrust, That two red fires in both their faces blazed; She thought he blushed, as knowing Tarquin's lust, And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed; Her earnest eye did make him more amazed: The more saw the blood his cheeks replenish, The more she thought he spied in her some blemish. But long she thinks till he return again, And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone. The weary time she cannot entertain, For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, to groan: So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, That she her plaints a little while doth stay, Pausing for means to mourn some newer way. At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy; Before the which is drawn the power of Greece, For Helen's rape the city to destroy, Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy; Which the conceited painter drew so proud, As heaven, it seem'd, to kiss the turrets bow'd. A thousand lamentable objects there, In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life: Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear, Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife: The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife; The dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights, Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights. There might you see the labouring pioner Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust; And from the towers of Troy there would appear The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust: Such sweet observance in this work was had, That one might see those far-off eyes look sad. In great commanders grace and majesty You might behold, triumphing in their faces; In youth, quick bearing and dexterity; And here and there the painter interlaces Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces; Which heartless peasants did so well resemble, That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble. In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art Of physiognomy might one behold! The face of either cipher'd either's heart; Their face their manners most expressly told: In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigour roll'd; But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent Show'd deep regard and smiling government. There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand, As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight; Making such sober action with his hand, That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight: In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white, Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly Thin winding breath, which curl'd up to the sky. About him were a press of gaping faces, Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice; All jointly listening, but with several graces, As if some mermaid did their ears entice, Some high, some low, the painter was so nice; The scalps of many, almost hid behind, To jump up higher seem'd, to mock the mind. Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head, His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear, Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red; Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear; And in their rage such signs of rage they bear, As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words, It seem'd they would debate with angry swords. For much imaginary work was there; Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind, That for Achilles' image stood his spear, Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind, Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind: A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head, Stood for the whole to be imagined, And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field, Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield; And to their hope they such odd action yield, That through their light joy seemed to appear, Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear, And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought, To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran, Whose waves to imitate the battle sought With swelling ridges; and their ranks began To break upon the galled shore, and than Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks, They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks. To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come, To find a face where all distress is stell'd. Many she sees where cares have carved some, But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd, Till she despairing Hecuba beheld, Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes, Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies. In her the painter had anatomized Time's ruin, beauty's wreck, and grim cares reign: Her cheeks with chops and wrinkles were disguised; Of what she was no semblance did remain: Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed, Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead. On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes, And shapes her sorrow to the bedlam's woes, Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, And bitter words to ban her cruel foes: The painter was no god to lend her those; And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong, To give her so much grief and not a tongue. 'Poor instrument,' quoth she, 'without a sound, I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue; And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound, And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong; And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long; And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies. 'Show me the strumpet that began this stir, That with my nails her beauty I may tear. Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear: Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here; And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye, The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die. 'Why should the private pleasure of some one Become the public plague of many moe? Let sin, alone committed, light alone Upon his head that hath transgressed so; Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe: For one's offence why should so many fall, To plague a private sin in general? 'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies, Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds, Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies, And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds, And one man's lust these many lives confounds: Had doting Priam check'd his son's desire, Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.' Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes: For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell, Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; Then little strength rings out the doleful knell: So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow: She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow. She throws her eyes about the painting round, And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament. At last she sees a wretched image bound, That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent: His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content; Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes. In him the painter labour'd with his skill To hide deceit, and give the harmless show An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still, A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe; Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so That blushing red no guilty instance gave, Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have. But, like a constant and confirmed devil, He entertain'd a show so seeming just, And therein so ensconced his secret evil, That jealousy itself cold not mistrust False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust Into so bright a day such black-faced storms, Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms. The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story The credulous Old Priam after slew; Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, And little stars shot from their fixed places, When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces. This picture she advisedly perused, And chid the painter for his wondrous skill, Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused; So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill: And still on him she gazed; and gazing still, Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied, That she concludes the picture was belied. 'It cannot be, quoth she, 'that so much guile' She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;' But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while, And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took: 'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook, And turn'd it thus, 'It cannot be, I find, But such a face should bear a wicked mind: 'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted, So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild, As if with grief or travail he had fainted, To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled With outward honesty, but yet defiled With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish, So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish. 'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes, To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds! Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise? For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds: His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds; Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity, Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city. 'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell; For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold, And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell; These contraries such unity do hold, Only to flatter fools and make them bold: So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter, That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.' Here, all enraged, such passion her assails, That patience is quite beaten from her breast. She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, Comparing him to that unhappy guest Whose deed hath made herself herself detest: At last she smilingly with this gives o'er; 'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.' Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, And time doth weary time with her complaining. She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow, And both she thinks too long with her remaining: Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining: Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps; And they that watch see time how slow it creeps. Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought, That she with painted images hath spent; Being from the feeling of her own grief brought By deep surmise of others' detriment: Losing her woes in shows of discontent. It easeth some, though none it ever cured, To think their dolour others have endured. But now the mindful messenger, come back, Brings home his lord and other company; Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black: And round about her tear-distained eye Blue circles stream'd, like rainbows in the sky: These water-galls in her dim element Foretell new storms to those already spent. Which when her sad-beholding husband saw, Amazedly in her sad face he stares: Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw, Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares. He hath no power to ask her how she fares: Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance, Met far from home, wondering each other's chance. At last he takes her by the bloodless hand, And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand? Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent? Why art thou thus attired in discontent? Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness, And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.' Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire, Ere once she can discharge one word of woe: At length address'd to answer his desire, She modestly prepares to let them know Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe; While Collatine and his consorted lords With sad attention long to hear her words. And now this pale swan in her watery nest Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending; 'Few words,' quoth she, 'shall fit the trespass best, Where no excuse can give the fault amending: In me moe woes than words are now depending; And my laments would be drawn out too long, To tell them all with one poor tired tongue. 'Then be this all the task it hath to say: Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed A stranger came, and on that pillow lay Where thou wast wont to rest thy weary head; And what wrong else may be imagined By foul enforcement might be done to me, From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free. 'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight, With shining falchion in my chamber came A creeping creature, with a flaming light, And softly cried Awake, thou Roman dame, And entertain my love; else lasting shame On thee and thine this night I will inflict, If thou my love's desire do contradict. 'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine, quoth he, Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will, I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee And swear I found you where you did fulfil The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill The lechers in their deed: this act will be <|endofpoem|> My fame and thy perpetual infamy. 'With this, I did begin to start and cry; And then against my heart he sets his sword, Swearing, unless I took all patiently, I should not live to speak another word; So should my shame still rest upon record, And never be forgot in mighty Rome Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom. Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak, And far the weaker with so strong a fear: My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak; No rightful plea might plead for justice there: His scarlet lust came evidence to swear That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes; And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies. 'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse! Or at the least this refuge let me find; Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse, Immaculate and spotless is my mind; That was not forced; that never was inclined To accessary yieldings, but still pure Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.' Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss, With head declined, and voice damm'd up with woe, With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across, From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow The grief away that stops his answer so: But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain; What he breathes out his breath drinks up again. As through an arch the violent roaring tide Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste; Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride Back to the strait that forced him on so fast; In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past: Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw. To push grief on, and back the same grief draw. Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth, And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh: 'Dear Lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth Another power; no flood by raining slaketh. My woe too sensible thy passion maketh More feeling-painful: let it then suffice To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes. 'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me: Be suddenly revenged on my foe, Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die; For sparing justice feeds iniquity. 'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she, Speaking to those that came with Collatine, 'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me, With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine; For 'tis a meritorious fair design To chase injustice with revengeful arms: Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.' At this request, with noble disposition Each present lord began to promise aid, As bound in knighthood to her imposition, Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd. But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, The protestation stops. 'O, speak,' quoth she, 'How may this forced stain be wiped from me? 'What is the quality of mine offence, Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance? May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, My low-declined honour to advance? May any terms acquit me from this chance? The poison'd fountain clears itself again; And why not I from this compelled stain? With this, they all at once began to say, Her body's stain her mind untainted clears; While with a joyless smile she turns away The face, that map which deep impression bears Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears. 'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living, By my excuse shall claim excuses giving. Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break, She throws forth Tarquin's name: 'He, he,' she says, But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak; Till after many accents and delays, Untimely breathings, sick and short assays, She utters this, 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he, That guides this hand to give this wound to me.' Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed: That blow did bail it from the deep unrest Of that polluted prison where it breathed: Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeathed Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny. Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed, Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew; Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed, Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw; And from the purple fountain Brutus drew The murderous knife, and, as it left the place, Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase; And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood Circles her body in on every side, Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood. Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd, And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd. About the mourning and congealed face Of that black blood a watery rigol goes, Which seems to weep upon the tainted place: And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes, Corrupted blood some watery token shows; And blood untainted still doth red abide, Blushing at that which is so putrified. 'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries, 'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived. If in the child the father's image lies, Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? Thou wast not to this end from me derived If children pre-decease progenitors, We are their offspring, and they none of ours. 'Poor broken glass, I often did behold In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; But now that fair fresh mirror, dim and old, Shows me a bare-boned death by time outworn: O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn, And shiver'd all the beauty of my glass, That I no more can see what once I was! 'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer, If they surcease to be that should survive. Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger And leave the faltering feeble souls alive? The old bees die, the young possess their hive: Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see Thy father die, and not thy father thee!' By this, starts Collatine as from a dream, And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place; And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face, And counterfeits to die with her a space; Till manly shame bids him possess his breath And live to be revenged on her death. The deep vexation of his inward soul Who, mad that sorrow should his use control, Or keep him from heart-easing words so long, Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid, That no man could distinguish what he said. Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain, But through his teeth, as if the name he tore. This windy tempest, till it blow up rain, Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er: Then son and father weep with equal strife Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife. The one doth call her his, the other his, Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. The father says 'She's mine.' 'O, mine she is,' Replies her husband: 'do not take away My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say He weeps for her, for she was only mine, And only must be wail'd by Collatine.' 'O,' quoth Lucretius, 'I did give that life Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.' 'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife, I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.' 'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life, Answer'd their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife.' Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side, Seeing such emulation in their woe, Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show. He with the Romans was esteemed so For sportive words and uttering foolish things: But now he throws that shallow habit by, Wherein deep policy did him disguise; And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly, To check the tears in Collatinus' eyes. 'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth he, 'arise: Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, Now set thy long-experienced wit to school. 'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe? Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds? Is it revenge to give thyself a blow For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds: Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so, To slay herself, that should have slain her foe. 'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart In such relenting dew of lamentations; But kneel with me and help to bear thy part, To rouse our Roman gods with invocations, That they will suffer these abominations, Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced, By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased. 'Now, by the Capitol that we adore, And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd, By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store, By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd, And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife, We will revenge the death of this true wife.' This said, he struck his hand upon his breast, And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow; And to his protestation urged the rest, Who, wondering at him, did his words allow: Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow; And that deep vow, which Brutus made before, He doth again repeat, and that they swore. When they had sworn to this advised doom, They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence; To show her bleeding body thorough Rome, And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence: Which being done with speedy diligence, The Romans plausibly did give consent To Tarquin's everlasting banishment. Let the bird of loudest lay, On the sole Arabian tree, Herald sad and trumpet be, To whose sound chaste wings obey. But thou, shrieking harbinger, Foul pre-currer of the fiend, Augur of the fever's end, To this troop come thou not near. From this session interdict Every fowl of tyrant wing, Save the eagle, feather'd king: Keep the obsequy so strict. Let the priest in surplice white, That defunctive music can, Be the death-defying swan, Lest the requiem lack his right. And thou, treble-dated crow, That thy sable gender mak'st With the breath thou giv'st and tak'st, 'Mongst our mourners shalt thou go. Here the anthem doth commence: Love and constancy is dead; Phoenix and the turtle fled In a mutual flame from hence. So they lov'd, as love in twain Had the essence but in one; Two distincts, division none: Number there in love was slain. Hearts remote, yet not asunder; Distance, and no space was seen 'Twixt the turtle and his queen; But in them it were a wonder. So between them love did shine, That the turtle saw his right Flaming in the phoenix' sight: Either was the other's mine. Property was thus appall'd, That the self was not the same; Single nature's double name Neither two nor one was call'd. Reason, in itself confounded, Saw division grow together; To themselves yet either-neither, Simple were so well compounded. That it cried how true a twain Seemeth this concordant one! Love hath reason, reason none If what parts can so remain. Whereupon it made this threne To the phoenix and the dove, Co-supreme and stars of love; As chorus to their tragic scene. Beauty, truth, and rarity. Grace in all simplicity, Here enclos'd in cinders lie. Death is now the phoenix' nest; And the turtle's loyal breast To eternity doth rest, Leaving no posterity: 'Twas not their infirmity, It was married chastity. Truth may seem, but cannot be: Beauty brag, but 'tis not she; Truth and beauty buried be. To this urn let those repair That are either true or fair; For these dead birds sigh a prayer. Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye, 'Gainst whom the world could not hold argument, Persuade my heart to this false perjury? Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment. A woman I forswore; but I will prove, Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee: My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love; Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me. My vow was breath, and breath a vapour is; Then, thou fair sun, that on this earth doth shine, Exhale this vapour vow; in thee it is: If broken, then it is no fault of mine. If by me broke, what fool is not so wise To break an oath, to win a paradise? Sweet Cytherea, sitting by a brook With young Adonis, lovely, fresh, and green, Did court the lad with many a lovely look, Such looks as none could look but beauty's queen. She told him stories to delight his ear; She show'd him favours to allure his eye; To win his heart, she touch'd him here and there: Touches so soft still conquer chastity. But whether unripe years did want conceit, Or he refus'd to take her figur'd proffer, The tender nibbler would not touch the bait, But smile and jest at every gentle offer: Then fell she on her back, fair queen, and toward; He rose and ran away; ah, fool too froward! If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love? O never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd: Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll constant prove; Those thoughts, to me like oaks, to thee like osiers bow'd. Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes, Where all those pleasures live that art can comprehend. If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice; Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend; All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder; Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire: Thy eye Jove's lightning seems, thy voice his dreadful thunder, Which not to anger bent is music and sweet fire. Celestial as thou art, O do not love that wrong, To sing heavens' praise with such an earthly tongue. Scarce had the sun dried up the dewy morn, And scarce the herd gone to the hedge for shade, When Cytherea, all in love forlorn, A longing tarriance for Adonis made, Under an osier growing by a brook, A brook where Adon used to cool his spleen. Hot was the day; she hotter that did look For his approach, that often there had been. Anon he comes, and throws his mantle by, And stood stark naked on the brook's green brim; The sun look'd on the world with glorious eye, Yet not so wistly as this queen on him: He, spying her, bounc'd in, whereas he stood; O Jove, quoth she, why was not I a flood? Fair is my love, but not so fair as fickle; Mild as a dove, but neither true nor trusty; Brighter than glass, and yet, as glass is, brittle; Softer than wax, and yet, as iron, rusty: A lily pale, with damask die to grace her, None fairer, nor none falser to deface her. Her lips to mine how often hath she join'd, Between each kiss her oaths of true love swearing! How many tales to please me hath she coin'd, Dreading my love, the loss thereof still fearing! Yet in the midst of all her pure protestings, Her faith, her oaths, her tears, and all were jestings. She burn'd with love, as straw with fire flameth; She burn'd out love, as soon as straw outburneth; She fram'd the love, and yet she foil'd the framing; She bade love last, and yet she fell a turning. Was this a lover, or a lecher whether? Bad in the best, though excellent in neither. If music and sweet poetry agree, As they must needs, the sister and the brother, Then must the love be great 'twixt thee and me, Because thou lovest the one, and I the other. Dowland to thee is dear, whose heavenly touch Upon the lute doth ravish human sense; Spenser to me, whose deep conceit is such As, passing all conceit, needs no defence. Thou lov'st to hear the sweet melodious sound That Phoebus' lute, the queen of music, makes; And I in deep delight am chiefly drown'd Whenas himself to singing he betakes. One god is god of both, as poets feign; One knight loves both, and both in thee remain. Fair was the morn when the fair queen of love, Paler for sorrow than her milk-white dove, For Adon's sake, a youngster proud and wild; Her stand she takes upon a steep-up hill: Anon Adonis comes with horn and hounds; She, silly queen, with more than love's good will, Forbade the boy he should not pass those grounds; Once, quoth she, did I see a fair sweet youth Here in these brakes deep-wounded with a boar, Deep in the thigh, a spectacle of ruth! See, in my thigh, quoth she, here was the sore. She showed hers: he saw more wounds than one, And blushing fled, and left her all alone. Sweet rose, fair flower, untimely pluck'd, soon vaded, Pluck'd in the bud, and vaded in the spring! Bright orient pearl, alack! too timely shaded! Fair creature, kill'd too soon by death's sharp sting! Like a green plum that hangs upon a tree, And falls, through wind, before the fall should be. I weep for thee, and yet no cause I have; For why? thou left'st me nothing in thy will: And yet thou left'st me more than I did crave; For why? I craved nothing of thee still: O yes, dear friend, I pardon crave of thee, Thy discontent thou didst bequeath to me. Venus, with young Adonis sitting by her, Under a myrtle shade, began to woo him: She told the youngling how god Mars did try her, And as he fell to her, so fell she to him. Even thus, quoth she, the warlike god embrac'd me, And then she clipp'd Adonis in her arms; Even thus, quoth she, the warlike god unlaced me; As if the boy should use like loving charms; Even thus, quoth she, he seized on my lips, And with her lips on his did act the seizure; And as she fetched breath, away he skips, And would not take her meaning nor her pleasure. Ah! that I had my lady at this bay, To kiss and clip me till I run away! Crabbed age and youth Cannot live together Youth is full of pleasance, Age is full of care; Youth like summer morn, Age like winter weather; Youth like summer brave, Age like winter bare; Youth is full of sport, Age's breath is short; Youth is nimble, age is lame; Youth is hot and bold, Age is weak and cold; Youth is wild, and age is tame. Age, I do abhor thee; Youth, I do adore thee; O, my love, my love is young! Age, I do defy thee; O, sweet shepherd, hie thee, For methinks thou stay'st too long. Beauty is but a vain and doubtful good, A shining gloss that vadeth suddenly; A flower that dies when first it 'gins to bud; A brittle glass, that's broken presently: A doubtful good, a gloss, a glass, a flower, Lost, vaded, broken, dead within an hour. And as goods lost are seld or never found, As vaded gloss no rubbing will refresh, As flowers dead lie wither'd on the ground, As broken glass no cement can redress, So beauty blemish'd once, for ever's lost, In spite of physic, painting, pain and cost. Good night, good rest. Ah! neither be my share: She bade good night that kept my rest away; And daff'd me to a cabin hang'd with care, To descant on the doubts of my decay. Farewell, quoth she, and come again tomorrow: Fare well I could not, for I supp'd with sorrow; Yet at my parting sweetly did she smile, In scorn or friendship, nill I construe whether: 'T may be, she joy'd to jest at my exile, 'T may be, again to make me wander thither: 'Wander,' a word for shadows like myself, As take the pain, but cannot pluck the pelf. Lord, how mine eyes throw gazes to the east! My heart doth charge the watch; the morning rise Doth cite each moving sense from idle rest. Not daring trust the office of mine eyes, While Philomela sits and sings, I sit and mark, And wish her lays were tuned like the lark; For she doth welcome daylight with her ditty, And drives away dark dismal-dreaming night: The night so pack'd, I post unto my pretty; Heart hath his hope, and eyes their wished sight; Sorrow chang'd to solace, solace mix'd with sorrow; For why, she sigh'd and bade me come tomorrow. Were I with her, the night would post too soon; But now are minutes added to the hours; To spite me now, each minute seems a moon; Yet not for me, shine sun to succour flowers! Pack night, peep day; good day, of night now borrow: Short, night, to-night, and length thyself to-morrow. WHEN I beheld the Poet blind, yet bold, In slender Book his vast Design unfold, Messiah Crown'd, Gods Reconcil'd Decree, Heav'n, Hell, Earth, Chaos, All; the Argument Held me a while misdoubting his Intent, That he would ruine for I saw him strong The sacred Truths to Fable and old Song So Sampson groap'd the Temples Posts in spight The World o'rewhelming to revenge his sight. Yet as I read soon growing less severe, I lik'd his Project, the success did fear; Through that wide Field how he his way should find O're which lame Faith leads Understanding blind; Lest he perplex'd the things he would explain, And what was easie he should render vain. Or if a Work so infinite he spann'd, Jealous I was that some less skilful hand Such as disquiet always what is well, And by ill imitating would excell Might hence presume the whole Creations day To change in Scenes, and show it in a Play. Pardon me, Mighty Poet, nor despise My causeless, yet not impious, surmise. But I am now convinc'd, and none will dare Within thy Labours to pretend a share, Thou hast not miss'd one thought that could be fit, And all that was improper dost omit: So that no room is here for Writers left, But to detect their Ignorance or Theft. That Majesty which through thy Work doth Reign Draws the Devout, deterring the Profane, And things divine thou treatst of in such state As them preserves, and thee, inviolate. At once delight and horrour on us seise, Thou singst with so much gravity and ease; And above humane flight dost soar aloft With Plume so strong, so equal, and so soft. The Bird nam'd from that Paradise you sing So never flaggs, but always keeps on Wing. Where couldst thou words of such a compass find? Whence furnish such a vast expence of mind? Just Heav'n thee like Tiresias to requite Rewards with Prophesie thy loss of sight. Well mightst thou scorn thy Readers to allure With tinkling Rhime, of thy own sense secure; While the Town-Bayes writes all the while and spells, And like a Pack-horse tires without his Bells: Their Fancies like our Bushy-points appear, The Poets tag them, we for fashion wear. I too transported by the Mode offend, And while I meant to Praise thee must Commend. Thy Verse created like thy Theme sublime, In Number, Weight, and Measure, needs not Rhime. Note: On Paradise Lost Added in the second edition . THIS first Book proposes first in brief the whole Subject, Mans Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal tast Brought Death into the World, and all our woe, With loss of Eden, till one greater Man Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat, Sing Heav'nly Muse, that on the secret top Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed, In the Beginning how the Heav'ns and Earth Delight thee more, and Siloa's Brook that flow'd Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence Invoke thy aid to my adventrous Song, That with no middle flight intends to soar Above th' Aonian Mount, while it pursues Things unattempted yet in Prose or Rhime. And chiefly Thou O Spirit, that dost prefer Before all Temples th' upright heart and pure, Instruct me, for Thou know'st; Thou from the first Wast present, and with mighty wings outspread Dove-like satst brooding on the vast Abyss And mad'st it pregnant: What in me is dark Illumine, what is low raise and support; That to the highth of this great Argument I may assert th' Eternal Providence, And justifie the wayes of God to men. Say first, for Heav'n hides nothing from thy view Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause Mov'd our Grand Parents in that happy State, Favour'd of Heav'n so highly, to fall off From their Creator, and transgress his Will For one restraint, Lords of the World besides? Who first seduc'd them to that fowl revolt? Th' infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile Stird up with Envy and Revenge, deceiv'd The Mother of Mankinde, what time his Pride Had cast him out from Heav'n, with all his Host Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring To set himself in Glory above his Peers, He trusted to have equal'd the most High, If he oppos'd; and with ambitious aim Rais'd impious War in Heav'n and Battel proud With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power Hurld headlong flaming from th' Ethereal Skie With hideous ruine and combustion down To bottomless perdition, there to dwell In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire, Who durst defie th' Omnipotent to Arms. Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night To mortal men, he with his horrid crew Lay vanquisht, rowling in the fiery Gulfe Confounded though immortal: But his doom Reserv'd him to more wrath; for now the thought Both of lost happiness and lasting pain Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes That witness'd huge affliction and dismay Mixt with obdurate pride and stedfast hate: At once as far as Angels kenn he views The dismal Situation waste and wilde, A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round As one great Furnace flam'd, yet from those flames No light, but rather darkness visible Serv'd only to discover sights of woe, Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace And rest can never dwell, hope never comes That comes to all; but torture without end Still urges, and a fiery Deluge, fed With ever-burning Sulphur unconsum'd: Such place Eternal Justice had prepar'd For those rebellious, here their Prison ordain'd In utter darkness, and their portion set As far remov'd from God and light of Heav'n As from the Center thrice to th' utmost Pole. O how unlike the place from whence they fell! There the companions of his fall, o'rewhelm'd With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire, He soon discerns, and weltring by his side One next himself in power, and next in crime, Long after known in Palestine, and nam'd Beelzebub. To whom th' Arch-Enemy, And thence in Heav'n call'd Satan, with bold words Breaking the horrid silence thus began. If thou beest he; But O how fall'n! how chang'd From him, who in the happy Realms of Light Cloth'd with transcendent brightnes didst outshine Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league, United thoughts and counsels, equal hope, And hazard in the Glorious Enterprize, Joynd with me once, now misery hath joynd In equal ruin: into what Pit thou seest From what highth fal'n, so much the stronger provd He with his Thunder: and till then who knew The force of those dire Arms? yet not for those Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage Can else inflict do I repent or change, Though chang'd in outward lustre; that fixt mind And high disdain, from sence of injur'd merit, That with the mightiest rais'd me to contend, And to the fierce contention brought along Innumerable force of Spirits arm'd That durst dislike his reign, and me preferring, His utmost power with adverse power oppos'd In dubious Battel on the Plains of Heav'n, And shook his throne. What though the field be lost? All is not lost; the unconquerable Will, And study of revenge, immortal hate, And courage never to submit or yield: And what is else not to be overcome? That Glory never shall his wrath or might Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace With suppliant knee, and deifie his power Who from the terrour of this Arm so late Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed, That were an ignominy and shame beneath This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods And this Empyreal substance cannot fail, Since through experience of this great event In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanc't, We may with more successful hope resolve To wage by force or guile eternal Warr Irreconcileable, to our grand Foe, Who now triumphs, and in th' excess of joy Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heav'n. So spake th' Apostate Angel, though in pain, Vaunting aloud, but rackt with deep despare: And him thus answer'd soon his bold Compeer. O Prince, O Chief of many Throned Powers, That led th' imbattelld Seraphim to Warr Under thy conduct, and in dreadful deeds Fearless, endanger'd Heav'ns perpetual King; And put to proof his high Supremacy, Whether upheld by strength, or Chance, or Fate, Too well I see and rue the dire event, That with sad overthrow and foul defeat Hath lost us Heav'n, and all this mighty Host In horrible destruction laid thus low, As far as Gods and Heav'nly Essences Can Perish: for the mind and spirit remains Invincible, and vigour soon returns, Though all our Glory extinct, and happy state Here swallow'd up in endless misery. But what if he our Conquerour, whom I now Of force believe Almighty, since no less Then such could hav orepow'rd such force as ours Have left us this our spirit and strength intire Strongly to suffer and support our pains, That we may so suffice his vengeful ire, Or do him mightier service as his thralls By right of Warr, what e're his business be Here in the heart of Hell to work in Fire, Or do his Errands in the gloomy Deep; What can it then avail though yet we feel Strength undiminisht, or eternal being To undergo eternal punishment? Whereto with speedy words th' Arch-fiend reply'd. Fall'n Cherube, to be weak is miserable Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure, To do ought good never will be our task, But ever to do ill our sole delight, As being the contrary to his high will Whom we resist. If then his Providence Out of our evil seek to bring forth good, Our labour must be to pervert that end, And out of good still to find means of evil; Which oft times may succeed, so as perhaps Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb His inmost counsels from their destind aim. But see the angry Victor hath recall'd His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit Back to the Gates of Heav'n: The Sulphurous Hail Shot after us in storm, oreblown hath laid The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice Of Heav'n receiv'd us falling, and the Thunder, Wing'd with red Lightning and impetuous rage, Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep. Let us not slip th' occasion, whether scorn, Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe. Seest thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wilde, The seat of desolation, voyd of light, Save what the glimmering of these livid flames Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend From off the tossing of these fiery waves, There rest, if any rest can harbour there, And reassembling our afflicted Powers, Consult how we may henceforth most offend Our Enemy, our own loss how repair, How overcome this dire Calamity, What reinforcement we may gain from Hope, If not what resolution from despare. Thus Satan talking to his neerest Mate With Head up-lift above the wave, and Eyes That sparkling blaz'd, his other Parts besides Prone on the Flood, extended long and large Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge As whom the Fables name of monstrous size, Titanian, or Earth-born, that warr'd on Jove, Briarios or Typhon, whom the Den By ancient Tarsus held, or that Sea-beast Leviathan, which God of all his works Created hugest that swim th' Ocean stream: Him haply slumbring on the Norway foam The Pilot of some small night-founder'd Skiff, Deeming some Island, oft, as Sea-men tell, With fixed Anchor in his skaly rind Moors by his side under the Lee, while Night Invests the Sea, and wished Morn delayes: So stretcht out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay Chain'd on the burning Lake, nor ever thence Had ris'n or heav'd his head, but that the will And high permission of all-ruling Heaven Left him at large to his own dark designs, That with reiterated crimes he might Heap on himself damnation, while he sought Evil to others, and enrag'd might see How all his malice serv'd but to bring forth Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shewn On Man by him seduc't, but on himself Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance pour'd. Forthwith upright he rears from off the Pool His mighty Stature; on each hand the flames Drivn backward slope their pointing spires, & rowld In billows, leave i'th' midst a horrid Vale. Then with expanded wings he stears his flight Aloft, incumbent on the dusky Air That felt unusual weight, till on dry Land He lights, if it were Land that ever burn'd With solid, as the Lake with liquid fire; And such appear'd in hue, as when the force Of subterranean wind transports a Hill Torn from Pelorus, or the shatter'd side Of thundring Aetna, whose combustible And fewel'd entrals thence conceiving Fire, Sublim'd with Mineral fury, aid the Winds, And leave a singed bottom all involv'd With stench and smoak: Such resting found the sole Of unblest feet. Him followed his next Mate, Both glorying to have scap't the Stygian flood As Gods, and by their own recover'd strength, Not by the sufferance of supernal Power. Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime, Said then the lost Arch Angel, this the seat That we must change for Heav'n, this mournful gloom For that celestial light? Be it so, since hee Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid What shall be right: fardest from him is best Whom reason hath equald, force hath made supream Above his equals. Farewel happy Fields Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrours, hail Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings A mind not to be chang'd by Place or Time. The mind is its own place, and in it self Can make a Heav'n of Hell, a Hell of Heav'n. What matter where, if I be still the same, And what I should be, all but less then hee Whom Thunder hath made greater? Here at least We shall be free; th' Almighty hath not built Here for his envy, will not drive us hence: Here we may reign secure, and in my choyce To reign is worth ambition though in Hell: Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heav'n. But wherefore let we then our faithful friends, Th' associates and copartners of our loss Lye thus astonisht on th' oblivious Pool, And call them not to share with us their part In this unhappy Mansion, or once more With rallied Arms to try what may be yet Regaind in Heav'n, or what more lost in Hell? So Satan spake, and him Beelzebub Thus answer'd. Leader of those Armies bright, Which but th' Omnipotent none could have foyld, If once they hear that voyce, their liveliest pledge Of hope in fears and dangers, heard so oft In worst extreams, and on the perilous edge Of battel when it rag'd, in all assaults Their surest signal, they will soon resume New courage and revive, though now they lye Groveling and prostrate on yon Lake of Fire, As we erewhile, astounded and amaz'd, No wonder, fall'n such a pernicious highth. He scarce had ceas't when the superiour Fiend Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield Ethereal temper, massy, large and round, Behind him cast; the broad circumference Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose Orb Through Optic Glass the Tuscan Artist views At Ev'ning from the top of Fesole, Or in Valdarno, to descry new Lands, Rivers or Mountains in her spotty Globe. His Spear, to equal which the tallest Pine Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the Mast Of some great Ammiral, were but a wand, He walkt with to support uneasie steps Over the burning Marle, not like those steps On Heavens Azure, and the torrid Clime Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with Fire; Knotholes he so endur'd, till on the Beach Of that inflamed Sea, he stood and call'd His Legions, Angel Forms, who lay intrans't Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strow the Brooks In Vallombrosa, where th' Etrurian shades High overarch't imbowr; or scatterd sedge Afloat, when with fierce Winds Orion arm'd Hath vext the Red-Sea Coast, whose waves orethrew While with perfidious hatred they pursu'd The Sojourners of Goshen, who beheld From the safe shore their floating Carkases And broken Chariot Wheels, so thick bestrown Abject and lost lay these, covering the Flood, Under amazement of their hideous change. He call'd so loud, that all the hollow Deep Of Hell resounded. Princes, Potentates, Warriers, the Flowr of Heav'n, once yours, now lost, If such astonishment as this can sieze Eternal spirits; or have ye chos'n this place After the toyl of Battel to repose Your wearied vertue, for the ease you find To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heav'n? Or in this abject posture have ye sworn To adore the Conquerour? who now beholds Cherube and Seraph rowling in the Flood With scatter'd Arms and Ensigns, till anon His swift pursuers from Heav'n Gates discern Th' advantage, and descending tread us down Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulfe. Awake, arise, or be for ever fall'n. They heard, and were abasht, and up they sprung Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread, Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake. Nor did they not perceave the evil plight In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel; Yet to their Generals Voyce they soon obeyd Innumerable. As when the potent Rod Wav'd round the Coast, up call'd a pitchy cloud Of Locusts, warping on the Eastern Wind, That ore the Realm of impious Pharoah hung Like Night, and darken'd all the Land of Nile: So numberless were those bad Angels seen Hovering on wing under the Cope of Hell 'Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding Fires; Till, as a signal giv'n, th' uplifted Spear Of their great Sultan waving to direct Thir course, in even ballance down they light On the firm brimstone, and fill all the Plain; A multitude, like which the populous North Pour'd never from her frozen loyns, to pass Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous Sons Came like a Deluge on the South, and spread Beneath Gibraltar to the Lybian sands. Forthwith from every Squadron and each Band The Heads and Leaders thither hast where stood Their great Commander; Godlike shapes and forms Excelling human, Princely Dignities, And Powers that earst in Heaven sat on Thrones; Though of their Names in heav'nly Records now Be no memorial, blotted out and ras'd By thir Rebellion, from the Books of Life. Nor had they yet among the Sons of Eve Got them new Names, till wandring ore the Earth, Through Gods high sufferance for the tryal of man, By falsities and lyes the greatest part Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake God their Creator, and th' invisible Glory of him, that made them, to transform Oft to the Image of a Brute, adorn'd With gay Religions full of Pomp and Gold, And Devils to adore for Deities: Then were they known to men by various Names, And various Idols through the Heathen World. Say, Muse, their Names then known, who first, who last, Rous'd from the slumber, on that fiery Couch, At thir great Emperors call, as next in worth Came singly where he stood on the bare strand, While the promiscuous croud stood yet aloof? The chief were those who from the Pit of Hell Roaming to seek their prey on earth, durst fix Their Seats long after next the Seat of God, Their Altars by his Altar, Gods ador'd Among the Nations round, and durst abide Jehovah thundring out of Sion, thron'd Between the Cherubim; yea, often plac'd Within his Sanctuary it self their Shrines, Abominations; and with cursed things His holy Rites, and solemn Feasts profan'd, And with their darkness durst affront his light. First Moloch, horrid King besmear'd with blood Of human sacrifice, and parents tears, Though for the noyse of Drums and Timbrels loud Their childrens cries unheard, that past through fire To his grim Idol. Him the Ammonite Worshipt in Rabba and her watry Plain, In Argob and in Basan, to the stream Of utmost Arnon. Nor content with such Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart Of Solomon he led by fraud to build His Temple right against the Temple of God On that opprobrious Hill, and made his Grove The pleasant Vally of Hinnom, Tophet thence And black Gehenna call'd, the Type of Hell. Next Chemos, th' obscene dread of Moabs Sons, From Aroer to Nebo, and the wild And Heronaim, Seons Realm, beyond The flowry Dale of Sibma clad with Vines, Peor his other Name, when he entic'd Israel in Sittim on their march from Nile To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe. Yet thence his lustful Orgies he enlarg'd Even to that Hill of scandal, by the Grove Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate; Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell. With these came they, who from the bordring flood Of old Euphrates to the Brook that parts Of Baalim and Ashtaroth, those male, These Feminine. For Spirits when they please Can either Sex assume, or both; so soft And uncompounded is their Essence pure, Not ti'd or manacl'd with joynt or limb, Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones, Like cumbrous flesh; but in what shape they choose Dilated or condens't, bright or obscure, Can execute their aerie purposes, And works of love or enmity fulfill. For those the Race of Israel oft forsook Their living strength, and unfrequented left His righteous Altar, bowing lowly down To bestial Gods; for which their heads as low Bow'd down in Battel, sunk before the Spear Of despicable foes. With these in troop Came Astoreth, whom the Phoenicians call'd Astarte, Queen of Heav'n, with crescent Horns; To whose bright Image nightly by the Moon Sidonian Virgins paid their Vows and Songs, In Sion also not unsung, where stood Her Temple on th' offensive Mountain, built By that uxorious King, whose heart though large, Beguil'd by fair Idolatresses, fell To Idols foul. Thammuz came next behind, Whose annual wound in Lebanon allur'd The Syrian Damsels to lament his fate In amorous dittyes all a Summers day, While smooth Adonis from his native Rock Ran purple to the Sea, suppos'd with blood Of Thammuz yearly wounded: the Love-tale Infected Sions daughters with like heat, Whose wanton passions in the sacred Porch Ezekiel saw, when by the Vision led His eye survay'd the dark Idolatries Of alienated Judah. Next came one Who mourn'd in earnest, when the Captive Ark Maim'd his brute Image, head and hands lopt off In his own Temple, on the grunsel edge, Where he fell flat, and sham'd his Worshipers: And downward Fish: yet had his Temple high Rear'd in Azotus, dreaded through the Coast And Accaron and Gaza's frontier bounds. Him follow'd Rimmon, whose delightful Seat Was fair Damascus, on the fertil Banks Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid streams. He also against the house of God was bold: A Leper once he lost and gain'd a King, Ahaz his sottish Conquerour, whom he drew Gods Altar to disparage and displace For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn His odious offrings, and adore the Gods Whom he had vanquisht. After these appear'd A crew who under Names of old Renown, Osiris, Isis, Orus and their Train With monstrous shapes and sorceries abus'd Thir wandring Gods disguis'd in brutish forms Rather then human. Nor did Israel scape Th' infection when their borrow'd Gold compos'd Doubl'd that sin in Bethel and in Dan, Lik'ning his Maker to the Grazed Ox, Jehovah, who in one Night when he pass'd Both her first born and all her bleating Gods. Belial came last, then whom a Spirit more lewd Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love Vice for it self: To him no Temple stood Or Altar smoak'd; yet who more oft then hee In Temples and at Altars, when the Priest Turns Atheist, as did Ely's Sons, who fill'd With lust and violence the house of God. In Courts and Palaces he also Reigns And in luxurious Cities, where the noyse Of riot ascends above thir loftiest Towrs, And injury and outrage: And when Night Darkens the Streets, then wander forth the Sons Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine. Witness the Streets of Sodom, and that night In Gibeah, when hospitable Dores Yielded thir Matrons to prevent worse rape. These were the prime in order and in might; The rest were long to tell, though far renown'd, Th' Ionian Gods, of Javans Issue held Gods, yet confest later then Heav'n and Earth Thir boasted Parents; Titan Heav'ns first born With his enormous brood, and birthright seis'd By younger Saturn, he from mightier Jove His own and Rhea's Son like measure found; So Jove usurping reign'd: these first in Creet And Ida known, thence on the Snowy top Of cold Olympus rul'd the middle Air Thir highest Heav'n; or on the Delphian Cliff, Or in Dodona, and through all the bounds Of Doric Land; or who with Saturn old Fled over Adria to th' Hesperian Fields, And ore the Celtic roam'd the utmost Isles. All these and more came flocking; but with looks Down cast and damp, yet such wherein appear'd Obscure som glimps of joy, to have found thir chief Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost In loss it self; which on his count'nance cast Like doubtful hue: but he his wonted pride Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore Semblance of worth not substance, gently rais'd Their fainted courage, and dispel'd their fears. Then strait commands that at the warlike sound Of Trumpets loud and Clarions be upreard His mighty Standard; that proud honour claim'd Azazel as his right, a Cherube tall: Who forthwith from the glittering Staff unfurld Th' Imperial Ensign, which full high advanc't Shon like a Meteor streaming to the Wind With Gemms and Golden lustre rich imblaz'd, Seraphic arms and Trophies: all the while Sonorous mettal blowing Martial sounds: At which the universal Host upsent A shout that tore Hells Concave, and beyond All in a moment through the gloom were seen Ten thousand Banners rise into the Air With Orient Colours waving: with them rose A Forrest huge of Spears: and thronging Helms Appear'd, and serried Shields in thick array Of depth immeasurable: Anon they move In perfect Phalanx to the Dorian mood Of Flutes and soft Recorders; such as rais'd To highth of noblest temper Hero's old Arming to Battel, and in stead of rage Deliberate valour breath'd, firm and unmov'd With dread of death to flight or foul retreat, Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage With solemn touches, troubl'd thoughts, and chase Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they Breathing united force with fixed thought Mov'd on in silence to soft Pipes that charm'd Thir painful steps o're the burnt soyle; and now Advanc't in view they stand, a horrid Front Of dreadful length and dazling Arms, in guise Of Warriers old with order'd Spear and Shield, Awaiting what command thir mighty Chief Had to impose: He through the armed Files Darts his experienc't eye, and soon traverse The whole Battalion views, thir order due, Thir visages and stature as of Gods, Thir number last he summs. And now his heart Distends with pride, and hardning in his strength Glories: For never since created man, Met such imbodied force, as nam'd with these Could merit more then that small infantry Warr'd on by Cranes: though all the Giant brood Of Phlegra with th' Heroic Race were joyn'd That fought at Theb's and Ilium, on each side Mixt with auxiliar Gods; and what resounds Begirt with British and Armoric Knights; And all who since, Baptiz'd or Infidel Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore When Charlemain with all his Peerage fell By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond Compare of mortal prowess, yet observ'd Thir dread Commander: he above the rest In shape and gesture proudly eminent Stood like a Towr; his form had yet not lost All her Original brightness, nor appear'd Less then Arch Angel ruind, and th' excess Of Glory obscur'd: As when the Sun new ris'n Looks through the Horizontal misty Air Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon In dim Eclips disastrous twilight sheds On half the Nations, and with fear of change Perplexes Monarchs. Dark'n'd so, yet shon Above them all th' Arch Angel: but his face Deep scars of Thunder had intrencht, and care Sat on his faded cheek, but under Browes Of dauntless courage, and considerate Pride Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast Signs of remorse and passion to behold The fellows of his crime, the followers rather Far other once beheld in bliss condemn'd For ever now to have their lot in pain, Millions of Spirits for his fault amerc't Of Heav'n, and from Eternal Splendors flung For his revolt, yet faithfull how they stood, Thir Glory witherd. As when Heavens Fire Hath scath'd the Forrest Oaks, or Mountain Pines, With singed top their stately growth though bare Stands on the blasted Heath. He now prepar'd To speak; whereat their doubl'd Ranks they bend From Wing to Wing, and half enclose him round With all his Peers: attention held them mute. Thrice he assayd, and thrice in spite of scorn, Tears such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last Words interwove with sighs found out their way. O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers Matchless, but with th' Almighty, and that strife Was not inglorious, though th' event was dire, As this place testifies, and this dire change Hateful to utter: but what power of mind Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth Of knowledge past or present, could have fear'd, How such united force of Gods, how such As stood like these, could ever know repulse? For who can yet beleeve, though after loss, That all these puissant Legions, whose exile Hath emptied Heav'n, shall faile to re-ascend Self-rais'd, and repossess their native seat. For me, be witness all the Host of Heav'n, If counsels different, or danger shun'd By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns Monarch in Heav'n, till then as one secure Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute, Consent or custome, and his Regal State Put forth at full, but still his strength conceal'd, Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall. Henceforth his might we know, and know our own So as not either to provoke, or dread New warr, provok't; our better part remains To work in close design, by fraud or guile What force effected not: that he no less At length from us may find, who overcomes By force, hath overcome but half his foe. Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife There went a fame in Heav'n that he ere long Intended to create, and therein plant A generation, whom his choice regard Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven: Thither, if but to prie, shall be perhaps Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere: For this Infernal Pit shall never hold Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaird, For who can think Submission? Warr then, Warr Open or understood must be resolv'd. He spake: and to confirm his words, out-flew Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze Far round illumin'd hell: highly they rag'd Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arm's Clash'd on their sounding shields the din of war, Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heav'n. There stood a Hill not far whose griesly top Belch'd fire and rowling smoak; the rest entire Shon with a glossie scurff, undoubted sign That in his womb was hid metallic Ore, The work of Sulphur. Thither wing'd with speed A numerous Brigad hasten'd. As when bands Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field, Or cast a Rampart. Mammon led them on, Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell From heav'n, for ev'n in heav'n his looks and thoughts Were always downward bent, admiring more The riches of Heav'ns pavement, trod'n Gold, Then aught divine or holy else enjoy'd In vision beatific: by him first Men also, and by his suggestion taught, Ransack'd the Center, and with impious hands Rifl'd the bowels of thir mother Earth For Treasures better hid. Soon had his crew Op'nd into the Hill a spacious wound And dig'd out ribs of Gold. Let none admire That riches grow in Hell; that soyle may best Deserve the pretious bane. And here let those Who boast in mortal things, and wondring tell Of Babel, and the works of Memphian Kings, Learn how thir greatest Monuments of Fame, And Strength and Art are easily outdone By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour What in an age they with incessant toyle And hands innumerable scarce perform Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepar'd, That underneath had veins of liquid fire Sluc'd from the Lake, a second multitude With wondrous Art founded the massie Ore, Severing each kinde, and scum'd the Bullion dross: A third as soon had form'd within the ground A various mould, and from the boyling cells By strange conveyance fill'd each hollow nook, As in an Organ from one blast of wind To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths. Anon out of the earth a Fabrick huge Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound Of Dulcet Symphonies and voices sweet, Built like a Temple, where Pilasters round Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid With Golden Architrave; nor did there want Cornice or Freeze, with bossy Sculptures grav'n, The Roof was fretted Gold. Not Babilon, Nor great Alcairo such magnificence Equal'd in all thir glories, to inshrine Belus or Serapis thir Gods, or seat In wealth and luxurie. Th' ascending pile Stood fixt her stately highth, and strait the dores Op'ning thir brazen foulds discover wide Within, her ample spaces, o're the smooth And level pavement: from the arched roof Pendant by suttle Magic many a row Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed With Naphtha and Asphaltus yeilded light As from a sky. The hasty multitude Admiring enter'd, and the work some praise And some the Architect: his hand was known In Heav'n by many a Towred structure high, Where Scepter'd Angels held thir residence, And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King Exalted to such power, and gave to rule, Each in his Herarchie, the Orders bright. Nor was his name unheard or unador'd In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land Men call'd him Mulciber; and how he fell From Heav'n, they fabl'd, thrown by angry Jove Sheer o're the Chrystal Battlements: from Morn To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve, A Summers day; and with the setting Sun Dropt from the Zenith like a falling Star, On Lemnos th' Aegaean Ile: thus they relate, Erring; for he with this rebellious rout Fell long before; nor aught avail'd him now To have built in Heav'n high Towrs; nor did he scape By all his Engins, but was headlong sent With his industrious crew to build in hell. Mean while the winged Haralds by command Of Sovran power, with awful Ceremony And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim A solemn Councel forthwith to be held At Pandaemonium, the high Capital Of Satan and his Peers: thir summons call'd From every and Band squared Regiment By place or choice the worthiest; they anon With hundreds and with thousands trooping came Attended: all access was throng'd, the Gates And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall Though like a cover'd field, where Champions bold Wont ride in arm'd, and at the Soldans chair Defi'd the best of Panim chivalry To mortal combat or carreer with Lance Thick swarm'd, both on the ground and in the air, Brusht with the hiss of russling wings. As Bees In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides, Poure forth thir populous youth about the Hive In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers Flie to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank, The suburb of thir Straw-built Cittadel, New rub'd with Baume, expatiate and confer Thir State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd Swarm'd and were straitn'd; till the Signal giv'n, Behold a wonder! they but now who seemd In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race Whose midnight Revels, by a Forrest side Or Fountain fome belated Peasant sees, Or dreams he sees, while over head the Moon Sits Arbitress, and neerer to the Earth Wheels her pale course, they on thir mirth & dance Intent, with jocond Music charm his ear; At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds. Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms Reduc'd thir shapes immense, and were at large, Though without number still amidst the Hall Of that infernal Court. But far within And in thir own dimensions like themselves The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim In close recess and secret conclave sat A thousand Demy-Gods on golden seat's, Frequent and full. After short silence then And summons read, the great consult began. door Expos'd a Matron . Note: who shall be sent who should be sent . High on a Throne of Royal State, which far Outshon the wealth of Ormus and of Ind, Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand Satan exalted sat, by merit rais'd To that bad eminence; and from despair Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue Vain Warr with Heav'n, and by success untaught His proud imaginations thus displaid. Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heav'n, For since no deep within her gulf can hold Immortal vigor, though opprest and fall'n, I give not Heav'n for lost. From this descent Celestial vertues rising, will appear More glorious and more dread then from no fall, And trust themselves to fear no second fate: Mee though just right, and the fixt Laws of Heav'n Did first create your Leader, next, free choice, With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight, Hath bin achievd of merit, yet this loss Thus farr at least recover'd, hath much more Establisht in a safe unenvied Throne Yielded with full consent. The happier state In Heav'n, which follows dignity, might draw Envy from each inferior; but who here Will envy whom the highest place exposes Formost to stand against the Thunderers aime Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share Of endless pain? where there is then no good For which to strive, no strife can grow up there From Faction; for none sure will claim in hell Precedence, none, whose portion is so small Of present pain, that with ambitious mind Will covet more. With this advantage then To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord, More then can be in Heav'n, we now return To claim our just inheritance of old, Surer to prosper then prosperity Could have assur'd us; and by what best way, Whether of open Warr or covert guile, We now debate; who can advise, may speak. He ceas'd, and next him Moloc, Scepter'd King Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit That fought in Heav'n; now fiercer by despair: His trust was with th' Eternal to be deem'd Equal in strength, and rather then be less Car'd not to be at all; with that care lost Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse He reckd not, and these words thereafter spake. My sentence is for open Warr: Of Wiles, More unexpert, I boast not: them let those Contrive who need, or when they need, not now. For while they sit contriving, shall the rest, Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait The Signal to ascend, sit lingring here Heav'ns fugitives, and for thir dwelling place Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame, By our delay? no, let us rather choose Arm'd with Hell flames and fury all at once O're Heav'ns high Towrs to force resistless way, Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise Of his Almighty Engin he shall hear Black fire and horror shot with equal rage Among his Angels; and his Throne it self Mixt with Tartarean Sulphur, and strange fire, His own invented Torments. But perhaps The way seems difficult and steep to scale With upright wing against a higher foe. Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench Of that forgetful Lake benumme not still, That in our proper motion we ascend Up to our native seat: descent and fall To us is adverse. Who but felt of late When the fierce Foe hung on our brok'n Rear Insulting, and pursu'd us through the Deep, With what compulsion and laborious flight We sunk thus low? Th' ascent is easie then; Th' event is fear'd; should we again provoke Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find To our destruction: if there be in Hell Fear to be worse destroy'd: what can be worse Then to dwell here, driv'n out from bliss, condemn'd In this abhorred deep to utter woe; Where pain of unextinguishable fire Must exercise us without hope of end The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge Inexorably, and the torturing houre Calls us to Penance? More destroy'd then thus We should be quite abolisht and expire. What fear we then? what doubt we to incense His utmost ire? which to the highth enrag'd, Will either quite consume us, and reduce To nothing this essential, happier farr Then miserable to have eternal being: Or if our substance be indeed Divine, And cannot cease to be, we are at worst On this side nothing; and by proof we feel Our power sufficient to disturb his Heav'n, And with perpetual inrodes to Allarme, Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne: He ended frowning, and his look denounc'd Desperate revenge, and Battel dangerous To less then Gods. On th' other side up rose Belial, in act more graceful and humane; A fairer person lost not Heav'n; he seemd For dignity compos'd and high exploit: But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue Dropt Manna, and could make the worse appear The better reason, to perplex and dash Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low; To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds Timorous and slothful: yet he pleas'd the eare, And with perswasive accent thus began. I should be much for open Warr, O Peers, As not behind in hate; if what was urg'd Main reason to perswade immediate Warr, Did not disswade me most, and seem to cast Ominous conjecture on the whole success: When he who most excels in fact of Arms, In what he counsels and in what excels Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair And utter dissolution, as the scope Of all his aim, after some dire revenge. First, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heav'n are fill'd With Armed watch, that render all access Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep Encamp thir Legions, or with obscure wing Scout farr and wide into the Realm of night, Scorning surprize. Or could we break our way By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise With blackest Insurrection, to confound Heav'ns purest Light, yet our great Enemie All incorruptible would on his Throne Sit unpolluted, and th' Ethereal mould Incapable of stain would soon expel Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire Victorious. Thus repuls'd, our final hope Is flat despair: we must exasperate Th' Almighty Victor to spend all his rage, And that must end us, that must be our cure, To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose, Though full of pain, this intellectual being, Those thoughts that wander through Eternity, To perish rather, swallowd up and lost In the wide womb of uncreated night, Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows, Let this be good, whether our angry Foe Can give it, or will ever? how he can Is doubtful; that he never will is sure. Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire, Belike through impotence, or unaware, To give his Enemies thir wish, and end Them in his anger, whom his anger saves To punish endless? wherefore cease we then? Say they who counsel Warr, we are decreed, Reserv'd and destin'd to Eternal woe; Whatever doing, what can we suffer more, What can we suffer worse? is this then worst, Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms? What when we fled amain, pursu'd and strook With Heav'ns afflicting Thunder, and besought The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seem'd A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay Chain'd on the burning Lake? that sure was worse. What if the breath that kindl'd those grim fires Awak'd should blow them into sevenfold rage And plunge us in the Flames? or from above Should intermitted vengeance Arme again His red right hand to plague us? what if all Her stores were op'n'd, and this Firmament Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire, Impendent horrors, threatning hideous fall One day upon our heads; while we perhaps Designing or exhorting glorious Warr, Caught in a fierie Tempest shall be hurl'd Each on his rock transfixt, the sport and prey Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk Under yon boyling Ocean, wrapt in Chains; There to converse with everlasting groans, Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd, Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse. Warr therefore, open or conceal'd, alike My voice disswades; for what can force or guile With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye Views all things at one view? he from heav'ns highth All these our motions vain, sees and derides; Not more Almighty to resist our might Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles. Shall we then live thus vile, the race of Heav'n Thus trampl'd, thus expell'd to suffer here Chains and these Torments? better these then worse By my advice; since fate inevitable The Victors will. To suffer, as to doe, Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust That so ordains: this was at first resolv'd, If we were wise, against so great a foe Contending, and so doubtful what might fall. I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold And vent'rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear What yet they know must follow, to endure Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain, The sentence of thir Conquerour: This is now Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear, Our Supream Foe in time may much remit His anger, and perhaps thus farr remov'd Not mind us not offending, satisfi'd With what is punish't; whence these raging fires Will slack'n, if his breath stir not thir flames. Our purer essence then will overcome Thir noxious vapour, or enur'd not feel, Or chang'd at length, and to the place conformd In temper and in nature, will receive Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain; This horror will grow milde, this darkness light, Besides what hope the never-ending flight Of future days may bring, what chance, what change Worth waiting, since our present lot appeers For happy though but ill, for ill not worst, If we procure not to our selves more woe. Thus Belial with words cloath'd in reasons garb Counsel'd ignoble ease, and peaceful sloath, Not peace: and after him thus Mammon spake. Either to disinthrone the King of Heav'n We warr, if warr be best, or to regain Our own right lost: him to unthrone we then May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yeild To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife: The former vain to hope argues as vain The latter: for what place can be for us Within Heav'ns bound, unless Heav'ns Lord supream We overpower? Suppose he should relent And publish Grace to all, on promise made Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we Stand in his presence humble, and receive Strict Laws impos'd, to celebrate his Throne With warbl'd Hymns, and to his Godhead sing Forc't Halleluiah's; while he Lordly sits Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes Our servile offerings. This must be our task In Heav'n, this our delight; how wearisom Eternity so spent in worship paid To whom we hate. Let us not then pursue By force impossible, by leave obtain'd Unacceptable, though in Heav'n, our state Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek Our own good from our selves, and from our own Live to our selves, though in this vast recess, Free, and to none accountable, preferring Hard liberty before the easie yoke Of servile Pomp. Our greatness will appear Then most conspicuous, when great things of small, Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse We can create, and in what place so e're Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain Through labour and endurance. This deep world Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst Thick clouds and dark doth Heav'ns all-ruling Sire Choose to reside, his Glory unobscur'd, And with the Majesty of darkness round Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar Must'ring thir rage, and Heav'n resembles Hell? As he our Darkness, cannot we his Light Imitate when we please? This Desart soile Wants not her hidden lustre, Gemms and Gold; Nor want we skill or art, from whence to raise Magnificence; and what can Heav'n shew more? Our torments also may in length of time Become our Elements, these piercing Fires As soft as now severe, our temper chang'd Into their temper; which must needs remove The sensible of pain. All things invite To peaceful Counsels, and the settl'd State Of order, how in safety best we may Compose our present evils, with regard Of what we are and where, dismissing quite All thoughts of Warr: ye have what I advise. He scarce had finisht, when such murmur filld Th' Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain The sound of blustring winds, which all night long Had rous'd the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull Sea-faring men orewatcht, whose Bark by chance Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay After the Tempest: Such applause was heard As Mammon ended, and his Sentence pleas'd, Advising peace: for such another Field They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear Wrought still within them; and no less desire To found this nether Empire, which might rise By pollicy, and long process of time, In emulation opposite to Heav'n. Which when Beelzebub perceiv'd, then whom, Satan except, none higher sat, with grave Aspect he rose, and in his rising seem'd A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven Deliberation sat and publick care; And Princely counsel in his face yet shon, Majestick though in ruin: sage he stood With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look Drew audience and attention still as Night Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake. Thrones and imperial Powers, off-spring of heav'n, Ethereal Vertues; or these Titles now Must we renounce, and changing stile be call'd Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote Inclines, here to continue, and build up here A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream, And know not that the King of Heav'n hath doom'd This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt From Heav'ns high jurisdiction, in new League Banded against his Throne, but to remaine In strictest bondage, though thus far remov'd, Under th' inevitable curb, reserv'd His captive multitude: For he, be sure, In highth or depth, still first and last will Reign Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part By our revolt, but over Hell extend His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule Us here, as with his Golden those in Heav'n. What sit we then projecting Peace and Warr? Warr hath determin'd us, and foild with loss Irreparable; tearms of peace yet none Voutsaf't or sought; for what peace will be giv'n To us enslav'd, but custody severe, And stripes, and arbitrary punishment Inflicted? and what peace can we return, But to our power hostility and hate, Untam'd reluctance, and revenge though slow, Yet ever plotting how the Conquerour least May reap his conquest, and may least rejoyce In doing what we most in suffering feel? Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need With dangerous expedition to invade Heav'n, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege, Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find Some easier enterprize? There is a place If ancient and prophetic fame in Heav'n Err not another World, the happy seat Of som new Race call'd Man, about this time To be created like to us, though less In power and excellence, but favour'd more Of him who rules above; so was his will Pronounc'd among the Gods, and by an Oath, That shook Heav'ns whol circumference, confirm'd. Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn What creatures there inhabit, of what mould, Or substance, how endu'd, and what thir Power, And where thir weakness, how attempted best, By force or suttlety: Though Heav'n be shut, And Heav'ns high Arbitrator sit secure In his own strength, this place may lye expos'd The utmost border of his Kingdom, left To their defence who hold it: here perhaps Som advantagious act may be achiev'd By sudden onset, either with Hell fire To waste his whole Creation, or possess All as our own, and drive as we were driven, The punie habitants, or if not drive, Seduce them to our Party, that thir God May prove thir foe, and with repenting hand Abolish his own works. This would surpass Common revenge, and interrupt his joy In our Confusion, and our Joy upraise In his disturbance; when his darling Sons Hurl'd headlong to partake with us, shall curse Thir frail Originals, and faded bliss, Faded so soon. Advise if this be worth Attempting, or to sit in darkness here Hatching vain Empires. Thus Beelzebub Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devis'd By Satan, and in part propos'd: for whence, But from the Author of all ill could Spring So deep a malice, to confound the race Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell To mingle and involve, done all to spite The great Creatour? But thir spite still serves His glory to augment. The bold design Pleas'd highly those infernal States, and joy Sparkl'd in all thir eyes; with full assent They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews. Well have ye judg'd, well ended long debate, Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are, Great things resolv'd; which from the lowest deep Will once more lift us up, in spight of Fate, Neerer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms And opportune excursion we may chance Re-enter Heav'n; or else in some milde Zone Dwell not unvisited of Heav'ns fair Light Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air, To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires Shall breath her balme. But first whom shall we send In search of this new world, whom shall we find Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandring feet The dark unbottom'd infinite Abyss And through the palpable obscure find out His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight Upborn with indefatigable wings Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive The happy Ile; what strength, what art can then Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe Through the strict Senteries and Stations thick Of Angels watching round? Here he had need All circumspection, and we now no less Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send, The weight of all and our last hope relies. This said, he sat; and expectation held His look suspence, awaiting who appeer'd To second, or oppose, or undertake The perilous attempt: but all sat mute, Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each In others count'nance red his own dismay Astonisht: none among the choice and prime Of those Heav'n-warring Champions could be found So hardie as to proffer or accept Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last Satan, whom now transcendent glory rais'd Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride Conscious of highest worth, unmov'd thus spake. O Progeny of Heav'n, Empyreal Thrones, With reason hath deep silence and demurr Seis'd us, though undismaid: long is the way And hard, that out of Hell leads up to Light; Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire, Outrageous to devour, immures us round Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant Barr'd over us prohibit all egress. These past, if any pass, the void profound Of unessential Night receives him next Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being Threatens him, plung'd in that abortive gulf. If thence he scape into what ever world, Or unknown Region, what remains him less Then unknown dangers and as hard escape. But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers, And this Imperial Sov'ranty, adorn'd With splendor, arm'd with power, if aught propos'd And judg'd of public moment, in the shape Of difficulty or danger could deterre Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign, Refusing to accept as great a share Of hazard as of honour, due alike To him who Reigns, and so much to him due Of hazard more, as he above the rest High honourd sits? Go therfore mighty powers, Terror of Heav'n, though fall'n; intend at home, While here shall be our home, what best may ease The present misery, and render Hell More tollerable; if there be cure or charm To respite or deceive, or slack the pain Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek Deliverance for us all: this enterprize None shall partake with me. Thus saying rose The Monarch, and prevented all reply, Prudent, least from his resolution rais'd Others among the chief might offer now Certain to be refus'd what erst they feard; And so refus'd might in opinion stand His rivals, winning cheap the high repute Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they Dreaded not more th' adventure then his voice Forbidding; and at once with him they rose; Thir rising all at once was as the sound Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend With awful reverence prone; and as a God Extoll him equal to the highest in Heav'n: Nor fail'd they to express how much they prais'd, That for the general safety he despis'd His own: for neither do the Spirits damn'd Loose all thir vertue; least bad men should boast Thir specious deeds on earth, which glory excites, Or close ambition varnisht o're with zeal. Thus they thir doubtful consultations dark Ended rejoycing in thir matchless Chief: As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, o'respread Heav'ns chearful face, the lowring Element Scowls ore the dark'nd lantskip Snow, or showre; If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet Extend his ev'ning beam, the fields revive, The birds thir notes renew, and bleating herds Attest thir joy, that hill and valley rings. O shame to men! Devil with Devil damn'd Firm concord holds, men onely disagree Of Creatures rational, though under hope Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace, Yet live in hatred, enmitie, and strife Among themselves, and levie cruel warres, Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy: As if which might induce us to accord Man had not hellish foes anow besides, That day and night for his destruction waite. The Stygian Councel thus dissolv'd; and forth In order came the grand infernal Peers, Midst came thir mighty Paramount, and seemd Alone th' Antagonist of Heav'n, nor less Then Hells dread Emperour with pomp Supream, And God-like imitated State; him round A Globe of fierie Seraphim inclos'd With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms. Then of thir Session ended they bid cry With Trumpets regal sound the great result: Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim Put to thir mouths the sounding Alchymie By Haralds voice explain'd: the hollow Abyss Heard farr and wide, and all the host of Hell With deafning shout, return'd them loud acclaim. Thence more at ease thir minds and somwhat rais'd By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers Disband, and wandring, each his several way Pursues, as inclination or sad choice Leads him perplext, where he may likeliest find Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain The irksome hours, till his great Chief return. Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime Upon the wing, or in swift race contend, As at th' Olympian Games or Pythian fields; Part curb thir fierie Steeds, or shun the Goal With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form. As when to warn proud Cities warr appears Wag'd in the troubl'd Skie, and Armies rush To Battel in the Clouds, before each Van Pric forth the Aerie Knights, and couch thir spears Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms From either end of Heav'n the welkin burns. Others with vast Typhoean rage more fell Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar. As when Alcides from Oealia Crown'd With conquest, felt th' envenom'd robe, and tore Through pain up by the roots Thessalian Pines, And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw Into th' Euboic Sea. Others more milde, Retreated in a silent valley, sing With notes Angelical to many a Harp Thir own Heroic deeds and hapless fall By doom of Battel; and complain that Fate Free Vertue should enthrall to Force or Chance. Thir song was partial, but the harmony What could it less when Spirits immortal sing? Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense, Others apart sat on a Hill retir'd, In thoughts more elevate, and reason'd high Fixt Fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute, And found no end, in wandring mazes lost. Of good and evil much they argu'd then, Of happiness and final misery, Passion and Apathie, and glory and shame, Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophie: Yet with a pleasing sorcerie could charm Pain for a while or anguish, and excite Fallacious hope, or arm th' obdured brest With stubborn patience as with triple steel. Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands, On bold adventure to discover wide That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps Might yeild them easier habitation, bend Four ways thir flying March, along the Banks Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge Into the burning Lake thir baleful streams; Abhorred Styx the flood of deadly hate, Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep; Cocytus, nam'd of lamentation loud Heard on the ruful stream; fierce Phlegeton Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage. Farr off from these a slow and silent stream, Lethe the River of Oblivion roules Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks, Forthwith his former state and being forgets, Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain. Beyond this flood a frozen Continent Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice, A gulf profound as that Serbonian Bog Betwixt Damiata and mount Casius old, Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air Burns frore, and cold performs th' effect of Fire. Thither by harpy-footed Furies hail'd, At certain revolutions all the damn'd Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change Of fierce extreams, extreams by change more fierce, From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice Thir soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine Immovable, infixt, and frozen round, Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire. They ferry over this Lethean Sound Both to and fro, thir sorrow to augment, And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe, All in one moment, and so neer the brink; But fate withstands, and to oppose th' attempt Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards The Ford, and of it self the water flies All taste of living wight, as once it fled The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on In confus'd march forlorn, th' adventrous Bands With shuddring horror pale, and eyes agast View'd first thir lamentable lot, and found No rest: through many a dark and drearie Vaile They pass'd, and many a Region dolorous, O're many a Frozen, many a Fierie Alpe, Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death, A Universe of death, which God by curse Created evil, for evil only good, Where all life dies, death lives, and nature breeds, Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things, Abominable, inutterable, and worse Then Fables yet have feign'd, or fear conceiv'd, Gorgons and Hydra's, and Chimera's dire. Mean while the Adversary of God and Man, Satan with thoughts inflam'd of highest design, Puts on swift wings, and toward the Gates of Hell Explores his solitary flight; som times He scours the right hand coast, som times the left, Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soares Up to the fiery concave touring high. As when farr off at Sea a Fleet descri'd Close sailing from Bengala, or the Iles Of Ternate and Tidore, whence Merchants bring Thir spicie Drugs: they on the trading Flood Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole. So seem'd Farr off the flying Fiend: at last appeer Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof, And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock, Impenitrable, impal'd with circling fire, Yet unconsum'd. Before the Gates there sat On either side a formidable shape; The one seem'd Woman to the waste, and fair, But ended foul in many a scaly fould Voluminous and vast, a Serpent arm'd With mortal sting: about her middle round A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing bark'd With wide Cerberean mouths full loud, and rung A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep, If aught disturb'd thir noyse, into her woomb, And kennel there, yet there still bark'd and howl'd Within unseen. Farr less abhorrd then these Vex'd Scylla bathing in the Sea that parts Calabria from the hoarce Trinacrian shore: Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when call'd In secret, riding through the Air she comes Lur'd with the smell of infant blood, to dance With Lapland Witches, while the labouring Moon Eclipses at thir charms. The other shape, If shape it might be call'd that shape had none Distinguishable in member, joynt, or limb, Or substance might be call'd that shadow seem'd, For each seem'd either; black it stood as Night, Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell, And shook a dreadful Dart; what seem'd his head The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on. Satan was now at hand, and from his seat The Monster moving onward came as fast, With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode. Th' undaunted Fiend what this might be admir'd, Admir'd, not fear'd; God and his Son except, Created thing naught vallu'd he nor shun'd; And with disdainful look thus first began. Whence and what art thou, execrable shape, That dar'st, though grim and terrible, advance Thy miscreated Front athwart my way To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass, That be assur'd, without leave askt of thee: Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof, Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heav'n. To whom the Goblin full of wrauth reply'd, Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou hee, Who first broke peace in Heav'n and Faith, till then Unbrok'n, and in proud rebellious Arms Drew after him the third part of Heav'ns Sons Conjur'd against the highest, for which both Thou And they outcast from God, are here condemn'd To waste Eternal daies in woe and pain? And reck'n'st thou thy self with Spirits of Heav'n, Hell-doomd, and breath'st defiance here and scorn, Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more, Thy King and Lord? Back to thy punishment, False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings, Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue Thy lingring, or with one stroke of this Dart Strange horror seise thee, and pangs unfelt before. So spake the grieslie terrour, and in shape, So speaking and so threatning, grew ten fold More dreadful and deform: on th' other side Incenc't with indignation Satan stood Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burn'd, That fires the length of Ophiucus huge In th' Artick Sky, and from his horrid hair Level'd his deadly aime; thir fatall hands No second stroke intend, and such a frown Each cast at th' other, as when two black Clouds With Heav'ns Artillery fraught, come rattling on Over the Caspian, then stand front to front Hov'ring a space, till Winds the signal blow To joyn thir dark Encounter in mid air: So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell Grew darker at thir frown, so matcht they stood; For never but once more was either like To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds Had been achiev'd, whereof all Hell had rung, Had not the Snakie Sorceress that sat Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key, Ris'n, and with hideous outcry rush'd between. O Father, what intends thy hand, she cry'd, Against thy only Son? What fury O Son, Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart Against thy Fathers head? and know'st for whom; For him who sits above and laughs the while At thee ordain'd his drudge, to execute What e're his wrath, which he calls Justice, bids, His wrath which one day will destroy ye both. She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest Forbore, then these to her Satan return'd: So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange Thou interposest, that my sudden hand Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds What it intends; till first I know of thee, What thing thou art, thus double-form'd, and why In this infernal Vaile first met thou call'st Me Father, and that Fantasm call'st my Son? I know thee not, nor ever saw till now Sight more detestable then him and thee. T' whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate reply'd; Hast thou forgot me then, and do I seem Now in thine eye so foul, once deemd so fair In Heav'n, when at th' Assembly, and in sight Of all the Seraphim with thee combin'd In bold conspiracy against Heav'ns King, All on a sudden miserable pain Surpris'd thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie swumm In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast Threw forth, till on the left side op'ning wide, Likest to thee in shape and count'nance bright, Then shining heav'nly fair, a Goddess arm'd Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seis'd All th' Host of Heav'n; back they recoild affraid At first, and call'd me Sin, and for a Sign Portentous held me; but familiar grown, I pleas'd, and with attractive graces won The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing Becam'st enamour'd, and such joy thou took'st With me in secret, that my womb conceiv'd A growing burden. Mean while Warr arose, And fields were fought in Heav'n; wherein remaind For what could else to our Almighty Foe Cleer Victory, to our part loss and rout Through all the Empyrean: down they fell Driv'n headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down Into this Deep, and in the general fall I also; at which time this powerful Key Into my hand was giv'n, with charge to keep These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass Without my op'ning. Pensive here I sat Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes. At last this odious offspring whom thou seest Thine own begotten, breaking violent way Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew Transform'd: but he my inbred enemie Forth issu'd, brandishing his fatal Dart Made to destroy: I fled, and cry'd out Death; Hell trembl'd at the hideous Name, and sigh'd From all her Caves, and back resounded Death. I fled, but he pursu'd though more, it seems, Inflam'd with lust then rage and swifter far, Me overtook his mother all dismaid, And in embraces forcible and foule Ingendring with me, of that rape begot These yelling Monsters that with ceasless cry Surround me, as thou sawst, hourly conceiv'd And hourly born, with sorrow infinite To me, for when they list into the womb That bred them they return, and howle and gnaw My Bowels, their repast; then bursting forth Afresh with conscious terrours vex me round, That rest or intermission none I find. Before mine eyes in opposition sits Grim Death my Son and foe, who sets them on, And me his Parent would full soon devour For want of other prey, but that he knows His end with mine involvd; and knows that I Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane, When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounc'd. But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope To be invulnerable in those bright Arms, Though temper'd heav'nly, for that mortal dint, Save he who reigns above, none can resist. She finish'd, and the suttle Fiend his lore Soon learnd, now milder, and thus answerd smooth. Dear Daughter, since thou claim'st me for thy Sire, And my fair Son here showst me, the dear pledge Of dalliance had with thee in Heav'n, and joys Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change Befalln us unforeseen, unthought of, know I come no enemie, but to set free From out this dark and dismal house of pain, Both him and thee, and all the heav'nly Host Of Spirits that in our just pretenses arm'd Fell with us from on high: from them I go This uncouth errand sole, and one for all My self expose, with lonely steps to tread Th' unfounded deep, & through the void immense To search with wandring quest a place foretold Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now Created vast and round, a place of bliss In the Pourlieues of Heav'n, and therein plac't A race of upstart Creatures, to supply Perhaps our vacant room, though more remov'd, Least Heav'n surcharg'd with potent multitude Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught Then this more secret now design'd, I haste To know, and this once known, shall soon return, And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen Wing silently the buxom Air, imbalm'd With odours; there ye shall be fed and fill'd Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey. He ceas'd, for both seemd highly pleasd, and Death Grinnd horrible a gastly smile, to hear His famine should be fill'd, and blest his mawe Destin'd to that good hour: no less rejoyc'd His mother bad, and thus bespake her Sire. The key of this infernal Pit by due, And by command of Heav'ns all-powerful King I keep, by him forbidden to unlock These Adamantine Gates; against all force Death ready stands to interpose his dart, Fearless to be o'rematcht by living might. But what ow I to his commands above Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down Into this gloom of Tartarus profound, To sit in hateful Office here confin'd, Inhabitant of Heav'n, and heav'nlie-born, Here in perpetual agonie and pain, With terrors and with clamors compasst round Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed: Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou My being gav'st me; whom should I obey But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon To that new world of light and bliss, among The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems Thy daughter and thy darling, without end. Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key, Sad instrument of all our woe, she took; And towards the Gate rouling her bestial train, Forthwith the huge Portcullis high up drew, Which but her self not all the Stygian powers Could once have mov'd; then in the key-hole turns Th' intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar Of massie Iron or sollid Rock with ease Unfast'ns: on a sudden op'n flie With impetuous recoile and jarring sound Th' infernal dores, and on thir hinges great Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook Of Erebus. She op'nd, but to shut Excel'd her power; the Gates wide op'n stood, That with extended wings a Bannerd Host Under spread Ensigns marching might pass through With Horse and Chariots rankt in loose array; So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth Cast forth redounding smoak and ruddy flame. Before thir eyes in sudden view appear The secrets of the hoarie deep, a dark Illimitable Ocean without bound, Without dimension, where length, breadth, and highth, And time and place are lost; where eldest Night And Chaos, Ancestors of Nature, hold Eternal Anarchie, amidst the noise Of endless warrs and by confusion stand. For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battel bring Thir embryon Atoms; they around the flag Of each his faction, in thir several Clanns, Light-arm'd or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow, Swarm populous, unnumber'd as the Sands Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil, Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise Thir lighter wings. To whom these most adhere, Hee rules a moment; Chaos Umpire sits, And by decision more imbroiles the fray By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter Chance governs all. Into this wilde Abyss, The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave, Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire, But all these in thir pregnant causes mixt Confus'dly, and which thus must ever fight, Unless th' Almighty Maker them ordain His dark materials to create more Worlds, Into this wilde Abyss the warie fiend Stood on the brink of Hell and look'd a while, Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith He had to cross. Nor was his eare less peal'd With noises loud and ruinous to compare Great things with small then when Bellona storms, With all her battering Engines bent to rase Som Capital City, or less then if this frame Of Heav'n were falling, and these Elements In mutinie had from her Axle torn The stedfast Earth. At last his Sail-broad Vannes He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoak Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets A vast vacuitie: all unawares Fluttring his pennons vain plumb down he drops Ten thousand fadom deep, and to this hour Down had been falling, had not by ill chance The strong rebuff of som tumultuous cloud Instinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him As many miles aloft: that furie stay'd, Quencht in a Boggie Syrtis, neither Sea, Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd on he fares, Treading the crude consistence, half on foot, Half flying; behoves him now both Oare and Saile. As when a Gryfon through the Wilderness With winged course ore Hill or moarie Dale, Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stelth Had from his wakeful custody purloind The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare, With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way, And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flyes: At length a universal hubbub wilde Of stunning sounds and voices all confus'd Born through the hollow dark assaults his eare With loudest vehemence: thither he plyes, Undaunted to meet there what ever power Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask Which way the neerest coast of darkness lyes Bordering on light; when strait behold the Throne Of Chaos, and his dark Pavilion spread Wide on the wasteful Deep; with him Enthron'd Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things, The consort of his Reign; and by them stood Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name Of Demogorgon; Rumor next and Chance, And Tumult and Confusion all imbroild, And Discord with a thousand various mouths. T' whom Satan turning boldly, thus. Ye Powers And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss, Chaos and Ancient Night, I come no Spie, With purpose to explore or to disturb The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint Wandring this darksome desart, as my way Lies through your spacious Empire up to light, Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek What readiest path leads where your gloomie bounds Confine with Heav'n; or if som other place From your Dominion won, th' Ethereal King Possesses lately, thither to arrive I travel this profound, direct my course; Directed, no mean recompence it brings To your behoof, if I that Region lost, All usurpation thence expell'd, reduce To her original darkness and your sway Which is my present journey and once more Erect the Standerd there of Ancient Night; Yours be th' advantage all, mine the revenge. Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old With faultring speech and visage incompos'd Answer'd. I know thee, stranger, who thou art, That mighty leading Angel, who of late Made head against Heav'ns King, though overthrown. I saw and heard, for such a numerous host Fled not in silence through the frighted deep With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout, Confusion worse confounded; and Heav'n Gates Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands Pursuing. I upon my Frontieres here Keep residence; if all I can will serve, That little which is left so to defend Encroacht on still through our intestine broiles Weakning the Scepter of old Night: first Hell Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath; Now lately Heaven and Earth, another World Hung ore my Realm, link'd in a golden Chain To that side Heav'n from whence your Legions fell: If that way be your walk, you have not farr; So much the neerer danger; goe and speed; Havock and spoil and ruin are my gain. He ceas'd; and Satan staid not to reply, But glad that now his Sea should find a shore, With fresh alacritie and force renew'd Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire Into the wilde expanse, and through the shock Of fighting Elements, on all sides round Environ'd wins his way; harder beset And more endanger'd, then when Argo pass'd Through Bosporus betwixt the justling Rocks: Or when Ulysses on the Larbord shunnd Charybdis, and by th' other whirlpool steard. So he with difficulty and labour hard Mov'd on, with difficulty and labour hee; But hee once past, soon after when man fell, Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain Following his track, such was the will of Heav'n, Pav'd after him a broad and beat'n way Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf Tamely endur'd a Bridge of wondrous length From Hell continu'd reaching th' utmost Orbe Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse With easie intercourse pass to and fro To tempt or punish mortals, except whom God and good Angels guard by special grace. But now at last the sacred influence Of light appears, and from the walls of Heav'n Shoots farr into the bosom of dim Night A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins Her fardest verge, and Chaos to retire As from her outmost works a brok'n foe With tumult less and with less hostile din, That Satan with less toil, and now with ease Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn; Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air, Weighs his spread wings, at leasure to behold Farr off th' Empyreal Heav'n, extended wide In circuit, undetermind square or round, With Opal Towrs and Battlements adorn'd Of living Saphire, once his native Seat; And fast by hanging in a golden Chain This pendant world, in bigness as a Starr Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon. Thither full fraught with mischievous revenge, Accurst, and in a cursed hour he hies. Hail holy light, ofspring of Heav'n first-born, Or of th' Eternal Coeternal beam May I express thee unblam'd? since God is light, And never but in unapproached light Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee, Bright effluence of bright essence increate. Or hear'st thou rather pure Ethereal stream, Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun, Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice Of God, as with a Mantle didst invest The rising world of waters dark and deep, Won from the void and formless infinite. Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing, Escap't the Stygian Pool, though long detain'd In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight Through utter and through middle darkness borne With other notes then to th' Orphean Lyre I sung of Chaos and Eternal Night, Taught by the heav'nly Muse to venture down The dark descent, and up to reascend, Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe, And feel thy sovran vital Lamp; but thou Revisit'st not these eyes, that rowle in vain To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn; So thick a drop serene hath quencht thir Orbs, Or dim suffusion veild. Yet not the more Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt Cleer Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill, Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief Thee Sion and the flowrie Brooks beneath That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow, Nightly I visit: nor somtimes forget Those other two equal'd with me in Fate, So were I equal'd with them in renown, Blind Thamyris and blind Maeonides, And Tiresias and Phineus Prophets old. Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid Tunes her nocturnal Note. Thus with the Year Seasons return, but not to me returns Day, or the sweet approach of Ev'n or Morn, Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose, Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine; But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark Surrounds me, from the chearful waies of men Cut off, and for the book of knowledg fair Presented with a Universal blanc Of Natures works to mee expung'd and ras'd, And wisdome at one entrance quite shut out. So much the rather thou Celestial light Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell Of things invisible to mortal sight. Now had the Almighty Father from above, From the pure Empyrean where he sits High Thron'd above all highth, bent down his eye, His own works and their works at once to view: Stood thick as Starrs, and from his sight receiv'd Beatitude past utterance; on his right The radiant image of his Glory sat, His onely Son; On Earth he first beheld Our two first Parents, yet the onely two Of mankind, in the happie Garden plac't, Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love, Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love In blissful solitude; he then survey'd Hell and the Gulf between, and Satan there Coasting the wall of Heav'n on this side Night In the dun Air sublime, and ready now To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet On the bare outside of this World, that seem'd Firm land imbosom'd without Firmament, Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air. Him God beholding from his prospect high, Wherein past, present, future he beholds, Thus to his onely Son foreseeing spake. Onely begotten Son, seest thou what rage Transports our adversarie, whom no bounds Prescrib'd, no barrs of Hell, nor all the chains Heapt on him there, nor yet the main Abyss Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems On desperat revenge, that shall redound Upon his own rebellious head. And now Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way Not farr off Heav'n, in the Precincts of light, Directly towards the new created World, And Man there plac't, with purpose to assay If him by force he can destroy, or worse, By som false guile pervert; and shall pervert; For man will heark'n to his glozing lyes, And easily transgress the sole Command, Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall Hee and his faithless Progenie: whose fault? Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee All he could have; I made him just and right, Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall. Such I created all th' Ethereal Powers And Spirits, both them who stood & them who faild; Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell. Not free, what proof could they have givn sincere Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love, Where onely what they needs must do, appeard, Not what they would? what praise could they receive? What pleasure I from such obedience paid, When Will and Reason Reason also is choice Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild, Made passive both, had servd necessitie, Not mee. They therefore as to right belongd, So were created, nor can justly accuse Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate; As if Predestination over-rul'd Thir will, dispos'd by absolute Decree Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed Thir own revolt, not I: if I foreknew, Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, Which had no less prov'd certain unforeknown. So without least impulse or shadow of Fate, Or aught by me immutablie foreseen, They trespass, Authors to themselves in all Both what they judge and what they choose; for so I formd them free, and free they must remain, Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain'd Thir freedom, they themselves ordain'd thir fall. The first sort by thir own suggestion fell, Self-tempted, self-deprav'd: Man falls deceiv'd By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace, The other none: in Mercy and Justice both, Through Heav'n and Earth, so shall my glorie excel, But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine. Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill'd All Heav'n, and in the blessed Spirits elect Sense of new joy ineffable diffus'd: Beyond compare the Son of God was seen Most glorious, in him all his Father shon Substantially express'd, and in his face Divine compassion visibly appeerd, Love without end, and without measure Grace, Which uttering thus he to his Father spake. O Father, gracious was that word which clos'd Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace; For which both Heav'n and Earth shall high extoll Thy praises, with th' innumerable sound Of Hymns and sacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne Encompass'd shall resound thee ever blest. For should Man finally be lost, should Man Thy creature late so lov'd, thy youngest Son Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd With his own folly? that be from thee farr, That farr be from thee, Father, who art Judge Of all things made, and judgest onely right. Or shall the Adversarie thus obtain His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfill His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught, Or proud return though to his heavier doom, Yet with revenge accomplish't and to Hell Draw after him the whole Race of mankind, By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self Abolish thy Creation, and unmake, For him, what for thy glorie thou hast made? So should thy goodness and thy greatness both Be questiond and blaspheam'd without defence. To whom the great Creatour thus reply'd. O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief delight, Son of my bosom, Son who art alone My word, my wisdom, and effectual might, All hast thou spok'n as my thoughts are, all As my Eternal purpose hath decreed: Man shall not quite be lost, but sav'd who will, Yet not of will in him, but grace in me Freely voutsaft; once more I will renew His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthrall'd By sin to foul exorbitant desires; Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand On even ground against his mortal foe, By me upheld, that he may know how frail His fall'n condition is, and to me ow All his deliv'rance, and to none but me. Some I have chosen of peculiar grace Elect above the rest; so is my will: The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd Thir sinful state, and to appease betimes Th' incensed Deitie, while offerd grace Invites; for I will cleer thir senses dark, What may suffice, and soft'n stonie hearts To pray, repent, and bring obedience due. To prayer, repentance, and obedience due, Though but endevord with sincere intent, Mine eare shall not be slow, mine eye not shut. And I will place within them as a guide My Umpire Conscience, whom if they will hear, Light after light well us'd they shall attain, And to the end persisting, safe arrive. This my long sufferance and my day of grace They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste; But hard be hard'nd, blind be blinded more, That they may stumble on, and deeper fall; And none but such from mercy I exclude. But yet all is not don; Man disobeying, Disloyal breaks his fealtie, and sinns Against the high Supremacie of Heav'n, Affecting God-head, and so loosing all, To expiate his Treason hath naught left, But to destruction sacred and devote, He with his whole posteritie must die, Die hee or Justice must; unless for him Som other able, and as willing, pay The rigid satisfaction, death for death. Say Heav'nly Powers, where shall we find such love, Which of ye will be mortal to redeem Mans mortal crime, and just th' unjust to save, Dwels in all Heaven charitie so deare? He ask'd, but all the Heav'nly Quire stood mute, And silence was in Heav'n: on mans behalf Patron or Intercessor none appeerd, Much less that durst upon his own head draw The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set. And now without redemption all mankind Must have bin lost, adjudg'd to Death and Hell By doom severe, had not the Son of God, In whom the fulness dwels of love divine, His dearest mediation thus renewd. Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace; And shall grace not find means, that finds her way, The speediest of thy winged messengers, To visit all thy creatures, and to all Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought, Happie for man, so coming; be her aide Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost; Attonement for himself or offering meet, Indebted and undon, hath none to bring: Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life I offer, on mee let thine anger fall; Account mee man; I for his sake will leave Thy bosom, and this glorie next to thee Freely put off, and for him lastly die Well pleas'd, on me let Death wreck all his rage; Under his gloomie power I shall not long Lie vanquisht; thou hast givn me to possess Life in my self for ever, by thee I live, Though now to Death I yeild, and am his due All that of me can die, yet that debt paid, Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsom grave His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soule For ever with corruption there to dwell; But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue My Vanquisher, spoild of his vanted spoile; Death his deaths wound shall then receive, & stoop Inglorious, of his mortall sting disarm'd. I through the ample Air in Triumph high Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show The powers of darkness bound. Thou at the sight Pleas'd, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile, While by thee rais'd I ruin all my Foes, Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave: Then with the multitude of my redeemd Shall enter Heaven long absent, and returne, Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud Of anger shall remain, but peace assur'd, And reconcilement; wrauth shall be no more Thenceforth, but in thy presence Joy entire. His words here ended, but his meek aspect Silent yet spake, and breath'd immortal love To mortal men, above which only shon Filial obedience: as a sacrifice Glad to be offer'd, he attends the will Of his great Father. Admiration seis'd All Heav'n, what this might mean, & whither tend Wondring; but soon th' Almighty thus reply'd: O thou in Heav'n and Earth the only peace Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou My sole complacence! well thou know'st how dear, To me are all my works, nor Man the least Though last created, that for him I spare Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save, By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost. Thou therefore whom thou only canst redeeme, Thir Nature also to thy Nature joyne; And be thy self Man among men on Earth, Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed, By wondrous birth: Be thou in Adams room The Head of all mankind, though Adams Son. As in him perish all men, so in thee As from a second root shall be restor'd, As many as are restor'd, without thee none. His crime makes guiltie all his Sons, thy merit Imputed shall absolve them who renounce Thir own both righteous and unrighteous deeds, And live in thee transplanted, and from thee Receive new life. So Man, as is most just, Shall satisfie for Man, be judg'd and die, And dying rise, and rising with him raise His Brethren, ransomd with his own dear life. So Heav'nly love shal outdoo Hellish hate, Giving to death, and dying to redeeme, So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate So easily destroy'd, and still destroyes In those who, when they may, accept not grace. Nor shalt thou by descending to assume Mans Nature, less'n or degrade thine owne. Because thou hast, though Thron'd in highest bliss Equal to God, and equally enjoying God-like fruition, quitted all to save A World from utter loss, and hast been found By Merit more then Birthright Son of God, Found worthiest to be so by being Good, Farr more then Great or High; because in thee Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds, Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne; Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reigne Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man, Anointed universal King; all Power I give thee, reign for ever, and assume Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supream Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce: All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell; When thou attended gloriously from Heav'n Shalt in the Skie appeer, and from thee send The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaime Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Windes The living, and forthwith the cited dead Of all past Ages to the general Doom Shall hast'n, such a peal shall rouse thir sleep. Then all thy Saints assembl'd, thou shalt judge Bad men and Angels, they arraignd shall sink Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full, Thenceforth shall be for ever shut. Mean while The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring New Heav'n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell And after all thir tribulations long See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds, With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth. Then thou thy regal Scepter shalt lay by, For regal Scepter then no more shall need, God shall be All in All. But all ye Gods, Adore him, who to compass all this dies, Adore the Son, and honour him as mee. No sooner had th' Almighty ceas't, but all The multitude of Angels with a shout Loud as from numbers without number, sweet As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heav'n rung With Jubilee, and loud Hosanna's fill'd Th' eternal Regions: lowly reverent Towards either Throne they bow, & to the ground With solemn adoration down they cast Thir Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold, Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once In Paradise, fast by the Tree of Life Began to bloom, but soon for mans offence To Heav'n remov'd where first it grew, there grows, And flours aloft shading the Fount of Life, And where the river of Bliss through midst of Heavn Rowls o're Elisian Flours her Amber stream; With these that never fade the Spirits Elect Bind thir resplendent locks inwreath'd with beams, Now in loose Garlands thick thrown off, the bright Pavement that like a Sea of Jasper shon Impurpl'd with Celestial Roses smil'd. Then Crown'd again thir gold'n Harps they took, Harps ever tun'd, that glittering by their side Like Quivers hung, and with Praeamble sweet Of charming symphonie they introduce Thir sacred Song, and waken raptures high; No voice exempt, no voice but well could joine Melodious part, such concord is in Heav'n. Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent, Eternal King; thee Author of all being, Fountain of Light, thy self invisible Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit'st Thron'd inaccessible, but when thou shad'st The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine, Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appeer, Yet dazle Heav'n, that brightest Seraphim Approach not, but with both wings veil thir eyes. Thee next they sang of all Creation first, In whose conspicuous count'nance, without cloud Made visible, th' Almighty Father shines, Whom else no Creature can behold; on thee Impresst the effulgence of his Glorie abides, Transfus'd on thee his ample Spirit rests. Hee Heav'n of Heavens and all the Powers therein By thee created, and by thee threw down Th' aspiring Dominations: thou that day Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder didst not spare, Nor stop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that shook Heav'ns everlasting Frame, while o're the necks Thou drov'st of warring Angels disarraid. Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaime Thee only extold, Son of thy Fathers might, To execute fierce vengeance on his foes, Not so on Man; him through their malice fall'n, Father of Mercie and Grace, thou didst not doome So strictly, but much more to pitie encline: No sooner did thy dear and onely Son Perceive thee purpos'd not to doom frail Man So strictly, but much more to pitie enclin'd, He to appease thy wrauth, and end the strife Of Mercy and Justice in thy face discern'd, Regardless of the Bliss wherein hee sat Second to thee, offerd himself to die For mans offence. O unexampl'd love, Love no where to be found less then Divine! Shall be the copious matter of my Song Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy praise Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoine. Thus they in Heav'n, above the starry Sphear, Thir happie hours in joy and hymning spent. Mean while upon the firm opacous Globe Of this round World, whose first convex divides The luminous inferior Orbs, enclos'd From Chaos and th' inroad of Darkness old, Satan alighted walks: a Globe farr off It seem'd, now seems a boundless Continent Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night Starless expos'd, and ever-threatning storms Of Chaos blustring round, inclement skie; Save on that side which from the wall of Heav'n Though distant farr som small reflection gaines Of glimmering air less vext with tempest loud: Here walk'd the Fiend at large in spacious field. As when a Vultur on Imaus bred, Whose snowie ridge the roving Tartar bounds, Dislodging from a Region scarce of prey To gorge the flesh of Lambs or yeanling Kids On Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams; But in his way lights on the barren plaines Of Sericana, where Chineses drive With Sails and Wind thir canie Waggons light: So on this windie Sea of Land, the Fiend Walk'd up and down alone bent on his prey, Alone, for other Creature in this place Living or liveless to be found was none, None yet, but store hereafter from the earth Up hither like Aereal vapours flew Of all things transitorie and vain, when Sin With vanity had filld the works of men: Both all things vain, and all who in vain things Built thir fond hopes of Glorie or lasting fame, Or happiness in this or th' other life; All who have thir reward on Earth, the fruits Of painful Superstition and blind Zeal, Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find Fit retribution, emptie as thir deeds; All th' unaccomplisht works of Natures hand, Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixt, Dissolvd on earth, fleet hither, and in vain, Till final dissolution, wander here, Not in the neighbouring Moon, as some have dreamd; Those argent Fields more likely habitants, Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold Betwixt th' Angelical and Human kinde: Hither of ill-joynd Sons and Daughters born First from the ancient World those Giants came With many a vain exploit, though then renownd: The builders next of Babel on the Plain Of Sennaar, and still with vain designe New Babels, had they wherewithall, would build: Others came single; hee who to be deemd A God, leap'd fondly into Aetna flames, Empedocles, and hee who to enjoy Plato's Elysium, leap'd into the Sea, Cleombrotus, and many more too long, White, Black and Grey, with all thir trumperie. Here Pilgrims roam, that stray'd so farr to seek In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heav'n; And they who to be sure of Paradise Dying put on the weeds of Dominic, Or in Franciscan think to pass disguis'd; They pass the Planets seven, and pass the fixt, And that Crystalline Sphear whose ballance weighs The Trepidation talkt, and that first mov'd; And now Saint Peter at Heav'ns Wicket seems To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot Of Heav'ns ascent they lift thir Feet, when loe A violent cross wind from either Coast Blows them transverse ten thousand Leagues awry Into the devious Air; then might ye see Cowles, Hoods and Habits with thir wearers tost And flutterd into Raggs, then Reliques, Beads, The sport of Winds: all these upwhirld aloft Fly o're the backside of the World farr off Into a Limbo large and broad, since calld The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown Long after, now unpeopl'd, and untrod; All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he pass'd, And long he wanderd, till at last a gleame Of dawning light turnd thither-ward in haste His travell'd steps; farr distant hee descries Ascending by degrees magnificent Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high, At top whereof, but farr more rich appeerd The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate Imbellisht, thick with sparkling orient Gemmes The Portal shon, inimitable on Earth By Model, or by shading Pencil drawn. The Stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw Angels ascending and descending, bands Of Guardians bright, when he from Esau fled To Padan-aram in the field of Luz, Dreaming by night under the open Skie, And waking cri'd, This is the Gate of Heav'n. Each Stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood There alwaies, but drawn up to Heav'n somtimes Viewless, and underneath a bright Sea flow'd Of Jasper, or of liquid Pearle, whereon Who after came from Earth, sayling arriv'd, Wafted by Angels, or flew o're the Lake Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds. The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare The Fiend by easie ascent, or aggravate His sad exclusion from the dores of Bliss. Direct against which op'nd from beneath, Just o're the blissful seat of Paradise, A passage down to th' Earth, a passage wide, Wider by farr then that of after-times Over Mount Sion, and, though that were large, Over the Promis'd Land to God so dear, By which, to visit oft those happy Tribes, On high behests his Angels to and fro Pass'd frequent, and his eye with choice regard From Paneas the fount of Jordans flood To Beersaba, where the Holy Land So wide the op'ning seemd, where bounds were set To darkness, such as bound the Ocean wave. Satan from hence now on the lower stair That scal'd by steps of Gold to Heav'n Gate Looks down with wonder at the sudden view Of all this World at once. As when a Scout Through dark and desart wayes with peril gone All night; at last by break of chearful dawne Obtains the brow of some high-climbing Hill, Which to his eye discovers unaware The goodly prospect of some forein land First-seen, or some renownd Metropolis With glistering Spires and Pinnacles adornd, Which now the Rising Sun guilds with his beams. Such wonder seis'd, though after Heaven seen, The Spirit maligne, but much more envy seis'd At sight of all this World beheld so faire. Round he surveys, and well might, where he stood So high above the circling Canopie Of Nights extended shade; from Eastern Point Of Libra to the fleecie Starr that bears Andromeda farr off Atlantick Seas Beyond th' Horizon; then from Pole to Pole He views in bredth, and without longer pause Down right into the Worlds first Region throws His flight precipitant, and windes with ease Through the pure marble Air his oblique way Amongst innumerable Starrs, that shon Stars distant, but nigh hand seemd other Worlds, Or other Worlds they seemd, or happy Iles, Like those Hesperian Gardens fam'd of old, Fortunate Fields, and Groves and flourie Vales, Thrice happy Iles, but who dwelt happy there He stayd not to enquire: above them all The golden Sun in splendor likest Heaven Allur'd his eye: Thither his course he bends Through the calm Firmament; but up or downe By center, or eccentric, hard to tell, Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie Alooff the vulgar Constellations thick, That from his Lordly eye keep distance due, Dispenses Light from farr; they as they move Thir Starry dance in numbers that compute Days, months, and years, towards his all-chearing Lamp Turn swift their various motions, or are turnd By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms The Univers, and to each inward part With gentle penetration, though unseen, Shoots invisible vertue even to the deep: So wondrously was set his Station bright. There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps Astronomer in the Sun's lucent Orbe Through his glaz'd Optic Tube yet never saw. The place he found beyond expression bright, Compar'd with aught on Earth, Medal or Stone; Not all parts like, but all alike informd Which radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire; If mettal, part seemd Gold, part Silver cleer; If stone, Carbuncle most or Chrysolite, Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that shon In Aarons Brest-plate, and a stone besides Imagind rather oft then elsewhere seen, That stone, or like to that which here below Philosophers in vain so long have sought, In vain, though by thir powerful Art they binde Volatil Hermes, and call up unbound In various shapes old Proteus from the Sea, Draind through a Limbec to his Native forme. What wonder then if fields and regions here Breathe forth Elixir pure, and Rivers run Potable Gold, when with one vertuous touch Th' Arch-chimic Sun so farr from us remote Produces with Terrestrial Humor mixt Here in the dark so many precious things Of colour glorious and effect so rare? Here matter new to gaze the Devil met Undazl'd, farr and wide his eye commands, For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade, But all Sun-shine, as when his Beams at Noon Culminate from th' Aequator, as they now Shot upward still direct, whence no way round Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Aire, No where so cleer, sharp'nd his visual ray To objects distant farr, whereby he soon Saw within kenn a glorious Angel stand, The same whom John saw also in the Sun: His back was turnd, but not his brightness hid; Of beaming sunnie Raies, a golden tiar Circl'd his Head, nor less his Locks behind Illustrious on his Shoulders fledge with wings Lay waving round; on som great charge imploy'd Hee seemd, or fixt in cogitation deep. Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope To find who might direct his wandring flight To Paradise the happie seat of Man, His journies end and our beginning woe. But first he casts to change his proper shape, Which else might work him danger or delay: And now a stripling Cherube he appeers, Not of the prime, yet such as in his face Youth smil'd Celestial, and to every Limb Sutable grace diffus'd, so well he feignd; Under a Coronet his flowing haire In curles on either cheek plaid, wings he wore Of many a colourd plume sprinkl'd with Gold, His habit fit for speed succinct, and held Before his decent steps a Silver wand. He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright, Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turnd, Admonisht by his eare, and strait was known Th' Arch-Angel Uriel, one of the seav'n Who in Gods presence, neerest to his Throne Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes That run through all the Heav'ns, or down to th' Earth Bear his swift errands over moist and dry, O're Sea and Land: him Satan thus accostes; Uriel, for thou of those seav'n Spirits that stand In sight of God's high Throne, gloriously bright, The first art wont his great authentic will Interpreter through highest Heav'n to bring, Where all his Sons thy Embassie attend; And here art likeliest by supream decree Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye To visit oft this new Creation round; Unspeakable desire to see, and know All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man, His chief delight and favour, him for whom All these his works so wondrous he ordaind, Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim Alone thus wandring. Brightest Seraph tell In which of all these shining Orbes hath Man His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none, But all these shining Orbes his choice to dwell; That I may find him, and with secret gaze, Or open admiration him behold On whom the great Creator hath bestowd Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces powrd; That both in him and all things, as is meet, The Universal Maker we may praise; Who justly hath drivn out his Rebell Foes To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss Created this new happie Race of Men To serve him better: wise are all his wayes. So spake the false dissembler unperceivd; For neither Man nor Angel can discern Hypocrisie, the only evil that walks Invisible, except to God alone, By his permissive will, through Heav'n and Earth: And oft though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps At wisdoms Gate, and to simplicitie Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguil'd Uriel, though Regent of the Sun, and held The sharpest sighted Spirit of all in Heav'n; Who to the fraudulent Impostor foule In his uprightness answer thus returnd. Faire Angel, thy desire which tends to know The works of God, thereby to glorifie The great Work-Maister, leads to no excess That reaches blame, but rather merits praise The more it seems excess, that led thee hither From thy Empyreal Mansion thus alone, To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps Contented with report heare onely in heav'n: For wonderful indeed are all his works, Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all Had in remembrance alwayes with delight; But what created mind can comprehend Thir number, or the wisdom infinite That brought them forth, but hid thir causes deep. I saw when at his Word the formless Mass, This worlds material mould, came to a heap: Confusion heard his voice, and wilde uproar Stood rul'd, stood vast infinitude confin'd; Till at his second bidding darkness fled, Light shon, and order from disorder sprung: Swift to thir several Quarters hasted then The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Aire, Fire, And this Ethereal quintessence of Heav'n Flew upward, spirited with various forms, That rowld orbicular, and turnd to Starrs Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move; Each had his place appointed, each his course, The rest in circuit walles this Universe. Look downward on that Globe whose hither side With light from hence, though but reflected, shines; That place is Earth the seat of Man, that light His day, which else as th' other Hemisphere Night would invade, but there the neighbouring Moon So call that opposite fair Starr her aide Timely interposes, and her monthly round Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heav'n; With borrowd light her countenance triform Hence fills and empties to enlighten th' Earth, And in her pale dominion checks the night. That spot to which I point is Paradise, Adams abode, those loftie shades his Bowre. Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires. Thus said, he turnd, and Satan bowing low, As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven, Where honour due and reverence none neglects, Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath, Down from th' Ecliptic, sped with hop'd success, Throws his steep flight with many an Aerie wheele, Nor staid, till on Niphates top he lights. O For that warning voice, which he who saw Th' Apocalyps, heard cry in Heaven aloud, Then when the Dragon, put to second rout, Came furious down to be reveng'd on men, Wo To The Inhabitants On Earth! that now, While time was, our first Parents had bin warnd The coming of thir secret foe, and scap'd Haply so scap'd his mortal snare; for now Satan, now first inflam'd with rage, came down, The Tempter ere th' Accuser of man-kind, To wreck on innocent frail man his loss Of that first Battel, and his flight to Hell: Yet not rejoycing in his speed, though bold, Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast, Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth Now rowling, boiles in his tumultuous brest, And like a devillish Engine back recoiles Upon himself; horror and doubt distract His troubl'd thoughts, and from the bottom stirr The Hell within him, for within him Hell He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell One step no more then from himself can fly By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair That slumberd, wakes the bitter memorie Of what he was, what is, and what must be Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue. Sometimes towards Eden which now in his view Lay pleasant, his grievd look he fixes sad, Sometimes towards Heav'n and the full-blazing Sun, Which now sat high in his Meridian Towre: Then much revolving, thus in sighs began. O thou that with surpassing Glory crownd, Look'st from thy sole Dominion like the God Of this new World; at whose sight all the Starrs Hide thir diminisht heads; to thee I call, But with no friendly voice, and add thy name O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams That bring to my remembrance from what state I fell, how glorious once above thy Spheare; Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down Warring in Heav'n against Heav'ns matchless King: Ah wherefore! he deservd no such return From me, whom he created what I was In that bright eminence, and with his good Upbraided none; nor was his service hard. What could be less then to afford him praise, The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks, How due! yet all his good prov'd ill in me, And wrought but malice; lifted up so high I sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher Would set me highest, and in a moment quit The debt immense of endless gratitude, So burthensome, still paying, still to ow; Forgetful what from him I still receivd, And understood not that a grateful mind By owing owes not, but still pays, at once Indebted and dischargd; what burden then? O had his powerful Destiny ordaind Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais'd Ambition. Yet why not? som other Power As great might have aspir'd, and me though mean Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great Fell not, but stand unshak'n, from within Or from without, to all temptations arm'd. Hadst thou the same free Will and Power to stand? Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse, But Heav'ns free Love dealt equally to all? Be then his Love accurst, since love or hate, To me alike, it deals eternal woe. Nay curs'd be thou; since against his thy will Chose freely what it now so justly rues. Me miserable! which way shall I flie Infinite wrauth, and infinite despaire? Which way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell; And in the lowest deep a lower deep Still threatning to devour me opens wide, To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heav'n. O then at last relent: is there no place Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left? None left but by submission; and that word Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc'd With other promises and other vaunts Then to submit, boasting I could subdue Th' Omnipotent. Ay me, they little know How dearly I abide that boast so vaine, Under what torments inwardly I groane; While they adore me on the Throne of Hell, With Diadem and Scepter high advanc'd The lower still I fall, onely Supream In miserie; such joy Ambition findes. But say I could repent and could obtaine By Act of Grace my former state; how soon Would highth recal high thoughts, how soon unsay What feign'd submission swore: ease would recant Vows made in pain, as violent and void. For never can true reconcilement grow Where wounds of deadly hate have peirc'd so deep: Which would but lead me to a worse relapse And heavier fall: so should I purchase deare Short intermission bought with double smart. This knows my punisher; therefore as farr From granting hee, as I from begging peace: All hope excluded thus, behold in stead Of us out-cast, exil'd, his new delight, Mankind created, and for him this World. So farwel Hope, and with Hope farwel Fear, Farwel Remorse: all Good to me is lost; Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least Divided Empire with Heav'ns King I hold By thee, and more then half perhaps will reigne; As Man ere long, and this new World shall know. Thus while he spake, each passion dimm'd his face Thrice chang'd with pale, ire, envie and despair, Which marrd his borrow'd visage, and betraid Him counterfet, if any eye beheld. For heav'nly mindes from such distempers foule Are ever cleer. Whereof hee soon aware, Each perturbation smooth'd with outward calme, Artificer of fraud; and was the first That practisd falshood under saintly shew, Deep malice to conceale, couch't with revenge: Yet not anough had practisd to deceive Uriel once warnd; whose eye pursu'd him down The way he went, and on th' Assyrian mount Saw him disfigur'd, more then could befall Spirit of happie sort: his gestures fierce He markd and mad demeanour, then alone, As he suppos'd, all unobserv'd, unseen. So on he fares, and to the border comes Of Eden, where delicious Paradise, Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green, As with a rural mound the champain head Of a steep wilderness, whose hairie sides With thicket overgrown, grottesque and wilde, Access deni'd; and over head up grew Insuperable highth of loftiest shade, Cedar, and Pine, and Firr, and branching Palm, A Silvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend Shade above shade, a woodie Theatre Of stateliest view. Yet higher then thir tops The verdurous wall of Paradise up sprung: Which to our general Sire gave prospect large Into his neather Empire neighbouring round. And higher then that Wall a circling row Of goodliest Trees loaden with fairest Fruit, Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue Appeerd, with gay enameld colours mixt: On which the Sun more glad impress'd his beams Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow, When God hath showrd the earth; so lovely seemd That Lantskip: And of pure now purer aire Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires Vernal delight and joy, able to drive All sadness but despair: now gentle gales Fanning thir odoriferous wings dispense Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole Those balmie spoiles. As when to them who saile Beyond the Cape Of Hope, and now are past Mozambic, off at Sea North-East windes blow Sabean Odours from the spicie shoare Of Arabie the blest, with such delay Well pleas'd they slack thir course, and many a League Cheard with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles. So entertaind those odorous sweets the Fiend Who came thir bane, though with them better pleas'd Then Asmodeus with the fishie fume, That drove him, though enamourd, from the Spouse Of Tobits Son, and with a vengeance sent Now to th' ascent of that steep savage Hill Satan had journied on, pensive and slow; But further way found none, so thick entwin'd, As one continu'd brake, the undergrowth Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplext All path of Man or Beast that past that way: One Gate there onely was, and that look'd East On th' other side: which when th' arch-fellon saw Due entrance he disdaind, and in contempt, At one slight bound high overleap'd all bound Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within Lights on his feet. As when a prowling Wolfe, Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey, Watching where Shepherds pen thir Flocks at eeve In hurdl'd Cotes amid the field secure, Leaps o're the fence with ease into the Fould: Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial dores, Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault, In at the window climbes, or o're the tiles; So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fould: So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climbe. Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life, The middle Tree and highest there that grew, Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life Thereby regaind, but sat devising Death To them who liv'd; nor on the vertue thought Of that life-giving Plant, but only us'd For prospect, what well us'd had bin the pledge Of immortalitie. So little knows Any, but God alone, to value right The good before him, but perverts best things To worst abuse, or to thir meanest use. Beneath him with new wonder now he views To all delight of human sense expos'd In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more, A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise Of God the Garden was, by him in the East Of Eden planted; Eden stretchd her Line Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian Kings, Or where the Sons of Eden long before Dwelt in Telassar: in this pleasant soile His farr more pleasant Garden God ordaind; Out of the fertil ground he caus'd to grow All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste; And all amid them stood the Tree of Life, High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life Our Death the Tree of Knowledge grew fast by, Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill. Southward through Eden went a River large, Nor chang'd his course, but through the shaggie hill Pass'd underneath ingulft, for God had thrown That Mountain as his Garden mould high rais'd Upon the rapid current, which through veins Of porous Earth with kindly thirst up drawn, Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill Waterd the Garden; thence united fell Down the steep glade, and met the neather Flood, Which from his darksom passage now appeers, And now divided into four main Streams, Runs divers, wandring many a famous Realme And Country whereof here needs no account, But rather to tell how, if Art could tell, How from that Saphire Fount the crisped Brooks, Rowling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold, With mazie error under pendant shades Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice Art In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon Powrd forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plaine, Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote The open field, and where the unpierc't shade Imbround the noontide Bowrs: Thus was this place, A happy rural seat of various view; Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and Balme, Others whose fruit burnisht with Golden Rinde Hung amiable, Hesperian Fables true, If true, here onely, and of delicious taste: Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs, and Flocks Grasing the tender herb, were interpos'd, Or palmie hilloc, or the flourie lap Of som irriguous Valley spread her store, Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose: Another side, umbrageous Grots and Caves Of coole recess, o're which the mantling Vine Layes forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall Down the slope hills, disperst, or in a Lake, That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crownd, Her chrystall mirror holds, unite thir streams. The Birds thir quire apply; aires, vernal aires, Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune The trembling leaves, while Universal Pan Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance Led on th' Eternal Spring. Not that faire field Of Enna, where Proserpin gathring flours Her self a fairer Floure by gloomie Dis Was gatherd, which cost Ceres all that pain To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove Of Daphne by Orontes, and th' inspir'd Castalian Spring might with this Paradise Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian Ile Girt with the River Triton, where old Cham, Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Libyan Jove, Young Bacchus from his Stepdame Rhea's eye; Nor where Abassin Kings thir issue Guard, Mount Amara, though this by som suppos'd True Paradise under the Ethiop Line By Nilus head, enclos'd with shining Rock, A whole dayes journey high, but wide remote From this Assyrian Garden, where the Fiend Saw undelighted all delight, all kind Of living Creatures new to sight and strange: Two of far nobler shape erect and tall, Godlike erect, with native Honour clad In naked Majestie seemd Lords of all, And worthie seemd, for in thir looks Divine The image of thir glorious Maker shon, Truth, Wisdome, Sanctitude severe and pure, Severe, but in true filial freedom plac't; Whence true autoritie in men; though both Not equal, as thir sex not equal seemd; For contemplation hee and valour formd, For softness shee and sweet attractive Grace, Hee for God only, shee for God in him: His fair large Front and Eye sublime declar'd Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks Round from his parted forelock manly hung Clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad: Shee as a vail down to the slender waste Her unadorned golden tresses wore Dissheveld, but in wanton ringlets wav'd As the Vine curles her tendrils, which impli'd Subjection, but requir'd with gentle sway, And by her yeilded, by him best receivd, Yeilded with coy submission, modest pride, And sweet reluctant amorous delay. Nor those mysterious parts were then conceald, Then was not guiltie shame, dishonest shame Of natures works, honor dishonorable, Sin-bred, how have ye troubl'd all mankind With shews instead, meer shews of seeming pure, And banisht from mans life his happiest life, Simplicitie and spotless innocence. So passd they naked on, nor shund the sight Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill: So hand in hand they passd, the lovliest pair That ever since in loves imbraces met, Adam the goodliest man of men since borne His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters Eve. Under a tuft of shade that on a green Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side They sat them down, and after no more toil Of thir sweet Gardning labour then suffic'd To recommend coole Zephyr, and made ease More easie, wholsom thirst and appetite More grateful, to thir Supper Fruits they fell, Nectarine Fruits which the compliant boughes Yeilded them, side-long as they sat recline On the soft downie Bank damaskt with flours: The savourie pulp they chew, and in the rinde Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream; Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles Wanted, nor youthful dalliance as beseems Fair couple, linkt in happie nuptial League, Alone as they. About them frisking playd All Beasts of th' Earth, since wilde, and of all chase Sporting the Lion rampd, and in his paw Dandl'd the Kid; Bears, Tygers, Ounces, Pards Gambold before them, th' unwieldy Elephant To make them mirth us'd all his might, and wreathd His Lithe Proboscis; close the Serpent sly Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine His breaded train, and of his fatal guile Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass Coucht, and now fild with pasture gazing sat, Or Bedward ruminating: for the Sun Declin'd was hasting now with prone carreer To th' Ocean Iles, and in th' ascending Scale Of Heav'n the Starrs that usher Evening rose: When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood, Scarce thus at length faild speech recoverd sad. O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold, Into our room of bliss thus high advanc't Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps, Not Spirits, yet to heav'nly Spirits bright Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue With wonder, and could love, so lively shines In them Divine resemblance, and such grace The hand that formd them on thir shape hath pourd. Ah gentle pair, yee little think how nigh Your change approaches, when all these delights Will vanish and deliver ye to woe, More woe, the more your taste is now of joy; Happie, but for so happie ill secur'd Long to continue, and this high seat your Heav'n Ill fenc't for Heav'n to keep out such a foe As now is enterd; yet no purpos'd foe To you whom I could pittie thus forlorne Though I unpittied: League with you I seek, And mutual amitie so streight, so close, That I with you must dwell, or you with me Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such Accept your Makers work; he gave it me, Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfould, To entertain you two, her widest Gates, And send forth all her Kings; there will be room, Not like these narrow limits, to receive Your numerous ofspring; if no better place, Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge On you who wrong me not for him who wrongd. And should I at your harmless innocence Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just, Honour and Empire with revenge enlarg'd, By conquering this new World, compels me now To do what else though damnd I should abhorre. So spake the Fiend, and with necessitie, The Tyrants plea, excus'd his devilish deeds. Then from his loftie stand on that high Tree Down he alights among the sportful Herd Of those fourfooted kindes, himself now one, Now other, as thir shape servd best his end Neerer to view his prey, and unespi'd To mark what of thir state he more might learn By word or action markt: about them round A Lion now he stalkes with fierie glare, Then as a Tiger, who by chance hath spi'd In some Purlieu two gentle Fawnes at play, Strait couches close, then rising changes oft His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground Whence rushing he might surest seise them both Grip't in each paw: when Adam first of men To first of women Eve thus moving speech, Turnd him all eare to heare new utterance flow. Sole partner and sole part of all these joyes, Dearer thy self then all; needs must the Power That made us, and for us this ample World Be infinitly good, and of his good As liberal and free as infinite, That rais'd us from the dust and plac't us here In all this happiness, who at his hand Have nothing merited, nor can performe Aught whereof hee hath need, hee who requires From us no other service then to keep This one, this easie charge, of all the Trees In Paradise that beare delicious fruit So various, not to taste that onely Tree Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life, So neer grows Death to Life, what ere Death is, Som dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowst God hath pronounc't it death to taste that Tree, The only sign of our obedience left Among so many signes of power and rule Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv'n Over all other Creatures that possesse Earth, Aire, and Sea. Then let us not think hard One easie prohibition, who enjoy Free leave so large to all things else, and choice Unlimited of manifold delights: But let us ever praise him, and extoll His bountie, following our delightful task To prune these growing Plants, & tend these Flours, Which were it toilsom, yet with thee were sweet. To whom thus Eve repli'd. O thou for whom And from whom I was formd flesh of thy flesh, And without whom am to no end, my Guide And Head, what thou hast said is just and right. For wee to him indeed all praises owe, And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy So farr the happier Lot, enjoying thee Preeminent by so much odds, while thou Like consort to thy self canst no where find. That day I oft remember, when from sleep I first awak't, and found my self repos'd Under a shade on flours, much wondring where And what I was, whence thither brought, and how. Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound Of waters issu'd from a Cave and spread Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmov'd Pure as th' expanse of Heav'n; I thither went With unexperienc't thought, and laid me downe On the green bank, to look into the cleer Smooth Lake, that to me seemd another Skie. As I bent down to look, just opposite, A Shape within the watry gleam appeerd Bending to look on me, I started back, It started back, but pleasd I soon returnd, Pleas'd it returnd as soon with answering looks Of sympathie and love, there I had fixt Mine eyes till now, and pin'd with vain desire, Had not a voice thus warnd me, What thou seest, What there thou seest fair Creature is thy self, With thee it came and goes: but follow me, And I will bring thee where no shadow staies Thy coming, and thy soft imbraces, hee Whose image thou art, him thou shall enjoy Inseparablie thine, to him shalt beare Multitudes like thy self, and thence be call'd Mother of human Race: what could I doe, But follow strait, invisibly thus led? Till I espi'd thee, fair indeed and tall, Under a Platan, yet methought less faire, Less winning soft, less amiablie milde, Then that smooth watry image; back I turnd, Thou following cryd'st aloud, Return fair Eve, Whom fli'st thou? whom thou fli'st, of him thou art, His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent Out of my side to thee, neerest my heart Substantial Life, to have thee by my side Henceforth an individual solace dear; Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim My other half: with that thy gentle hand Seisd mine, I yeilded, and from that time see How beauty is excelld by manly grace And wisdom, which alone is truly fair. So spake our general Mother, and with eyes Of conjugal attraction unreprov'd, And meek surrender, half imbracing leand On our first Father, half her swelling Breast Naked met his under the flowing Gold Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms Smil'd with superior Love, as Jupiter On Juno smiles, when he impregns the Clouds That shed May Flowers; and press'd her Matron lip With kisses pure: aside the Devil turnd For envie, yet with jealous leer maligne Ey'd them askance, and to himself thus plaind. Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two Imparadis't in one anothers arms The happier Eden, shall enjoy thir fill Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust, Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire, Among our other torments not the least, Still unfulfill'd with pain of longing pines; Yet let me not forget what I have gain'd From thir own mouths; all is not theirs it seems: One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge call'd, Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidd'n? Suspicious, reasonless. Why should thir Lord Envie them that? can it be sin to know, Can it be death? and do they onely stand By Ignorance, is that thir happie state, The proof of thir obedience and thir faith? O fair foundation laid whereon to build Thir ruine! Hence I will excite thir minds With more desire to know, and to reject Envious commands, invented with designe To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such, They taste and die: what likelier can ensue? But first with narrow search I must walk round This Garden, and no corner leave unspi'd; A chance but chance may lead where I may meet Some wandring Spirit of Heav'n, by Fountain side, Or in thick shade retir'd, from him to draw What further would be learnt. Live while ye may, Yet happie pair; enjoy, till I return, Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed. So saying, his proud step he scornful turn'd, But with sly circumspection, and began Through wood, through waste, o're hil, o're dale his roam. Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heav'n With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun Slowly descended, and with right aspect Against the eastern Gate of Paradise Leveld his eevning Rayes: it was a Rock Of Alablaster, pil'd up to the Clouds, Conspicuous farr, winding with one ascent Accessible from Earth, one entrance high; The rest was craggie cliff, that overhung Still as it rose, impossible to climbe. Betwixt these rockie Pillars Gabriel sat Chief of th' Angelic Guards, awaiting night; About him exercis'd Heroic Games Th' unarmed Youth of Heav'n, but nigh at hand Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold. Thither came Uriel, gliding through the Eeven On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Starr In Autumn thwarts the night, when vapors fir'd Impress the Air, and shews the Mariner From what point of his Compass to beware Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste. Gabriel, to thee thy cours by Lot hath giv'n Charge and strict watch that to this happie place No evil thing approach or enter in; This day at highth of Noon came to my Spheare A Spirit, zealous, as he seem'd, to know More of th' Almighties works, and chiefly Man Gods latest Image: I describ'd his way Bent all on speed, and markt his Aerie Gate; But in the Mount that lies from Eden North, Where he first lighted, soon discernd his looks Alien from Heav'n, with passions foul obscur'd: Mine eye pursu'd him still, but under shade Lost sight of him; one of the banisht crew I fear, hath ventur'd from the deep, to raise New troubles; him thy care must be to find. To whom the winged Warriour thus returnd: Uriel, no wonder if thy perfet sight, Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sitst, See farr and wide: in at this Gate none pass The vigilance here plac't, but such as come Well known from Heav'n; and since Meridian hour No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort, So minded, have oreleapt these earthie bounds On purpose, hard thou knowst it to exclude Spiritual substance with corporeal barr. But if within the circuit of these walks In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom Thou telst, by morrow dawning I shall know. So promis'd hee, and Uriel to his charge Returnd on that bright beam, whose point now raisd Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fall'n Beneath th' Azores; whither the prime Orb, Incredible how swift, had thither rowl'd Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth By shorter flight to th' East, had left him there Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend: Now came still Eevning on, and Twilight gray Had in her sober Liverie all things clad; Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird, They to thir grassie Couch, these to thir Nests Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale; She all night long her amorous descant sung; Silence was pleas'd: now glow'd the Firmament With living Saphirs: Hesperus that led The starrie Host, rode brightest, till the Moon Rising in clouded Majestie, at length Apparent Queen unvaild her peerless light, And o're the dark her Silver Mantle threw. When Adam thus to Eve: Fair Consort, th' hour Of night, and all things now retir'd to rest Mind us of like repose, since God hath set Labour and rest, as day and night to men Successive, and the timely dew of sleep Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long Rove idle unimploid, and less need rest; Man hath his daily work of body or mind Appointed, which declares his Dignitie, And the regard of Heav'n on all his waies; While other Animals unactive range, And of thir doings God takes no account. Tomorrow ere fresh Morning streak the East With first approach of light, we must be ris'n, And at our pleasant labour, to reform Yon flourie Arbors, yonder Allies green, Our walks at noon, with branches overgrown, That mock our scant manuring, and require More hands then ours to lop thir wanton growth: Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms, That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth, Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease; Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest. To whom thus Eve with perfet beauty adornd. My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst Unargu'd I obey; so God ordains, God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more Is womans happiest knowledge and her praise. With thee conversing I forget all time, All seasons and thir change, all please alike. Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet, With charm of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun When first on this delightful Land he spreads His orient Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour, Glistring with dew; fragrant the fertil earth After soft showers; and sweet the coming on Of grateful Eevning milde, then silent Night With this her solemn Bird and this fair Moon, And these the Gemms of Heav'n, her starrie train: But neither breath of Morn when she ascends With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, floure, Glistring with dew, nor fragrance after showers, Nor grateful Evening mild, nor silent Night With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon, Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet. But wherfore all night long shine these, for whom This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes? To whom our general Ancestor repli'd. Daughter of God and Man, accomplisht Eve, Those have thir course to finish, round the Earth, By morrow Eevning, and from Land to Land In order, though to Nations yet unborn, Ministring light prepar'd, they set and rise; Least total darkness should by Night regaine Her old possession, and extinguish life In Nature and all things, which these soft fires Not only enlighten, but with kindly heate Of various influence foment and warme, Temper or nourish, or in part shed down Thir stellar vertue on all kinds that grow On Earth, made hereby apter to receive Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray. These then, though unbeheld in deep of night, Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none, That heav'n would want spectators, God want praise; Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep: All these with ceasless praise his works behold Both day and night: how often from the steep Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard Celestial voices to the midnight air, Sole, or responsive each to others note Singing thir great Creator: oft in bands While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk With Heav'nly touch of instrumental sounds In full harmonic number joind, thir songs Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven. Thus talking hand in hand alone they pass'd On to thir blissful Bower; it was a place Chos'n by the sovran Planter, when he fram'd All things to mans delightful use; the roofe Of thickest covert was inwoven shade Laurel and Mirtle, and what higher grew Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side Acanthus, and each odorous bushie shrub Fenc'd up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour, Iris all hues, Roses, and Gessamin Rear'd high thir flourisht heads between, and wrought Mosaic; underfoot the Violet, Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay Broiderd the ground, more colour'd then with stone Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm durst enter none; Such was thir awe of man. In shadier Bower More sacred and sequesterd, though but feignd, Pan or Silvanus never slept, nor Nymph, Nor Faunus haunted. Here in close recess With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs Espoused Eve deckt first her Nuptial Bed, And heav'nly Quires the Hymenaean sung, What day the genial Angel to our Sire Brought her in naked beauty more adorn'd, More lovely then Pandora, whom the Gods Endowd with all thir gifts, and O too like In sad event, when to the unwiser Son Mankind with her faire looks, to be aveng'd On him who had stole Joves authentic fire. Thus at thir shadie Lodge arriv'd, both stood, Both turnd, and under op'n Skie ador'd The God that made both Skie, Air, Earth & Heav'n Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe And starrie Pole: Thou also mad'st the Night, Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day, Which we in our appointed work imployd Have finisht happie in our mutual help And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss Ordain'd by thee, and this delicious place For us too large, where thy abundance wants Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground. But thou hast promis'd from us two a Race To fill the Earth, who shall with us extoll Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake, And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep. This said unanimous, and other Rites Observing none, but adoration pure Which God likes best, into thir inmost bower Handed they went; and eas'd the putting off These troublesom disguises which wee wear, Strait side by side were laid, nor turnd I weene Adam from his fair Spouse, nor Eve the Rites Mysterious of connubial Love refus'd: Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk Of puritie and place and innocence, Defaming as impure what God declares Pure, and commands to som, leaves free to all. Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain Haile wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source Of human ofspring, sole proprietie, In Paradise of all things common else. By thee adulterous lust was driv'n from men Among the bestial herds to raunge, by thee Relations dear, and all the Charities Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known. Farr be it, that I should write thee sin or blame, Or think thee unbefitting holiest place, Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets, Whose Bed is undefil'd and chast pronounc't, Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs us'd. Here Love his golden shafts imploies, here lights His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings, Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unindeard, Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours Mixt Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal, Or Serenate, which the starv'd Lover sings To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain. These lulld by Nightingales imbraceing slept, And on thir naked limbs the flourie roof Showrd Roses, which the Morn repair'd. Sleep on, Blest pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek No happier state, and know to know no more. Now had night measur'd with her shaddowie Cone Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault, And from thir Ivorie Port the Cherubim Forth issuing at th' accustomd hour stood armd To thir night watches in warlike Parade, When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake. Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the South With strictest watch; these other wheel the North, Our circuit meets full West. As flame they part Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear. From these, two strong and suttle Spirits he calld That neer him stood, and gave them thus in charge. Ithuriel and Zephon, with wingd speed Search through this Garden, leav unsearcht no nook, But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge, Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harme. This Eevning from the Sun's decline arriv'd Who tells of som infernal Spirit seen Hitherward bent who could have thought? escap'd The barrs of Hell, on errand bad no doubt: Such where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring. So saying, on he led his radiant Files, Daz'ling the Moon; these to the Bower direct In search of whom they sought: him there they found Squat like a Toad, close at the eare of Eve; Assaying by his Devilish art to reach The Organs of her Fancie, and with them forge Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams, Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint Th' animal Spirits that from pure blood arise Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise At least distemperd, discontented thoughts, Vain hopes, vain aimes, inordinate desires Blown up with high conceits ingendring pride. Him thus intent Ithuriel with his Spear Touch'd lightly; for no falshood can endure Touch of Celestial temper, but returns Of force to its own likeness: up he starts Discoverd and surpriz'd. As when a spark Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid Fit for the Tun som Magazin to store Against a rumord Warr, the Smuttie graine With sudden blaze diffus'd, inflames the Aire: So started up in his own shape the Fiend. Back stept those two fair Angels half amaz'd So sudden to behold the grieslie King; Yet thus, unmovd with fear, accost him soon. Which of those rebell Spirits adjudg'd to Hell Com'st thou, escap'd thy prison, and transform'd, Why satst thou like an enemie in waite Here watching at the head of these that sleep? Know ye not then said Satan, filld with scorn, Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate For you, there sitting where ye durst not soare; Not to know mee argues your selves unknown, The lowest of your throng; or if ye know, Why ask ye, and superfluous begin Your message, like to end as much in vain? To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn. Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same, Or undiminisht brightness, to be known As when thou stoodst in Heav'n upright and pure; That Glorie then, when thou no more wast good, Departed from thee, and thou resembl'st now Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foule. But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep This place inviolable, and these from harm. So spake the Cherube, and his grave rebuke Severe in youthful beautie, added grace Invincible: abasht the Devil stood, And felt how awful goodness is, and saw Vertue in her shape how lovly, saw, and pin'd His loss; but chiefly to find here observd His lustre visibly impar'd; yet seemd Undaunted. If I must contend, said he, Best with the best, the Sender not the sent, Or all at once; more glorie will be wonn, Or less be lost. Thy fear, said Zephon bold, Will save us trial what the least can doe Single against thee wicked, and thence weak. The Fiend repli'd not, overcome with rage; But like a proud Steed reind, went hautie on, Chaumping his iron curb: to strive or flie He held it vain; awe from above had quelld His heart, not else dismai'd. Now drew they nigh The western point, where those half-rounding guards Just met, & closing stood in squadron joind Awaiting next command. To whom thir Chief Gabriel from the Front thus calld aloud. O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet Hasting this way, and now by glimps discerne Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade, And with them comes a third of Regal port, But faded splendor wan; who by his gate And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell, Not likely to part hence without contest; Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours. He scarce had ended, when those two approachd And brief related whom they brought, wher found, How busied, in what form and posture coucht. To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake. Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescrib'd To thy transgressions, and disturbd the charge Of others, who approve not to transgress By thy example, but have power and right To question thy bold entrance on this place; Imploi'd it seems to violate sleep, and those Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss? To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow. Gabriel, thou hadst in Heav'n th' esteem of wise, And such I held thee; but this question askt Puts me in doubt. Lives ther who loves his pain? Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell, Though thither doomd? Thou wouldst thy self, no doubt, And boldly venture to whatever place Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change Torment with ease, & soonest recompence Dole with delight, which in this place I sought; To thee no reason; who knowst only good, But evil hast not tri'd: and wilt object His will who bound us? let him surer barr His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay In that dark durance: thus much what was askt. The rest is true, they found me where they say; But that implies not violence or harme. Thus hee in scorn. The warlike Angel mov'd, Disdainfully half smiling thus repli'd. O loss of one in Heav'n to judge of wise, Since Satan fell, whom follie overthrew, And now returns him from his prison scap't, Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither Unlicenc't from his bounds in Hell prescrib'd; So wise he judges it to fly from pain However, and to scape his punishment. So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrauth, Which thou incurr'st by flying, meet thy flight Seavenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell, Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain Can equal anger infinite provok't. But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they Less hardie to endure? courageous Chief, The first in flight from pain, had'st thou alleg'd To thy deserted host this cause of flight, Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive. To which the Fiend thus answerd frowning stern. Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain, Insulting Angel, well thou knowst I stood Thy fiercest, when in Battel to thy aide The blasting volied Thunder made all speed And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear. But still thy words at random, as before, Argue thy inexperience what behooves From hard assaies and ill successes past A faithful Leader, not to hazard all Through wayes of danger by himself untri'd. I therefore, I alone first undertook To wing the desolate Abyss, and spie This new created World, whereof in Hell Fame is not silent, here in hope to find Better abode, and my afflicted Powers To settle here on Earth, or in mid Aire; Though for possession put to try once more What thou and thy gay Legions dare against; Whose easier business were to serve thir Lord High up in Heav'n, with songs to hymne his Throne, And practis'd distances to cringe, not fight. To whom the warriour Angel soon repli'd. To say and strait unsay, pretending first Wise to flie pain, professing next the Spie, Argues no Leader, but a lyar trac't, Satan, and couldst thou faithful add? O name, O sacred name of faithfulness profan'd! Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew? Armie of Fiends, fit body to fit head; Was this your discipline and faith ingag'd, Your military obedience, to dissolve Allegeance to th' acknowledg'd Power supream? And thou sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem Patron of liberty, who more then thou Once fawn'd, and cring'd, and servilly ador'd Heav'ns awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope To dispossess him, and thy self to reigne? But mark what I arreede thee now, avant; Flie thither whence thou fledst: if from this houre Within these hallowd limits thou appeer, Back to th' infernal pit I drag thee chaind, And Seale thee so, as henceforth not to scorne The facil gates of hell too slightly barrd. So threatn'd hee, but Satan to no threats Gave heed, but waxing more in rage repli'd. Then when I am thy captive talk of chaines, Proud limitarie Cherube, but ere then Farr heavier load thy self expect to feel From my prevailing arme, though Heavens King Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers, Us'd to the yoak, draw'st his triumphant wheels In progress through the rode of Heav'n Star-pav'd. While thus he spake, th' Angelic Squadron bright Turnd fierie red, sharpning in mooned hornes Thir Phalanx, and began to hemm him round With ported Spears, as thick as when a field Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind Swayes them; the careful Plowman doubting stands Least on the threshing floore his hopeful sheaves Prove chaff. On th' other side Satan allarm'd Collecting all his might dilated stood, Like Teneriff or Atlas unremov'd: His stature reacht the Skie, and on his Crest Sat horror Plum'd; nor wanted in his graspe What seemd both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds Might have ensu'd, nor onely Paradise In this commotion, but the Starrie Cope Of Heav'n perhaps, or all the Elements At least had gon to rack, disturbd and torne With violence of this conflict, had not soon Th' Eternal to prevent such horrid fray Hung forth in Heav'n his golden Scales, yet seen Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion signe, Wherein all things created first he weighd, The pendulous round Earth with ballanc't Aire In counterpoise, now ponders all events, Battels and Realms: in these he put two weights The sequel each of parting and of fight; The latter quick up flew, and kickt the beam; Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend. Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowst mine, Neither our own but giv'n; what follie then To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more Then Heav'n permits, nor mine, though doubld now To trample thee as mire: for proof look up, And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign Where thou art weigh'd, & shown how light, how weak, If thou resist. The Fiend lookt up and knew His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night. Now Morn her rosie steps in th' Eastern Clime Advancing, sow'd the Earth with Orient Pearle, When Adam wak't, so customd, for his sleep Was Aerie light, from pure digestion bred, And temperat vapors bland, which th' only sound Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan, Lightly dispers'd, and the shrill Matin Song Of Birds on every bough; so much the more His wonder was to find unwak'nd Eve With Tresses discompos'd, and glowing Cheek, As through unquiet rest: he on his side Leaning half-rais'd, with looks of cordial Love Hung over her enamour'd, and beheld Beautie, which whether waking or asleep, Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice Milde, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes, Her hand soft touching, whisperd thus. Awake My fairest, my espous'd, my latest found, Heav'ns last best gift, my ever new delight, Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove, What drops the Myrrhe, & what the balmie Reed, How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid sweet. Such whispering wak'd her, but with startl'd eye On Adam, whom imbracing, thus she spake. O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose, My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I see Thy face, and Morn return'd, for I this Night, Such night till this I never pass'd, have dream'd, If dream'd, not as I oft am wont, of thee, Works of day pass't, or morrows next designe, But of offence and trouble, which my mind Knew never till this irksom night; methought Close at mine ear one call'd me forth to walk With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said, Why sleepst thou Eve? now is the pleasant time, The cool, the silent, save where silence yields To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake Tunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reignes Full Orb'd the Moon, and with more pleasing light Shadowie sets off the face of things; in vain, If none regard; Heav'n wakes with all his eyes, Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire, In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze. I rose as at thy call, but found thee not; To find thee I directed then my walk; And on, methought, alone I pass'd through ways That brought me on a sudden to the Tree Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seem'd, Much fairer to my Fancie then by day: And as I wondring lookt, beside it stood One shap'd and wing'd like one of those from Heav'n By us oft seen; his dewie locks distill'd Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gaz'd; And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharg'd, Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet, Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despis'd? Or envie, or what reserve forbids to taste? Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold Longer thy offerd good, why else set here? This said he paus'd not, but with ventrous Arme He pluckt, he tasted; mee damp horror chil'd At such bold words voucht with a deed so bold: But he thus overjoy'd, O Fruit Divine, Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropt, Forbidd'n here, it seems, as onely fit For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men: And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more Communicated, more abundant growes, The Author not impair'd, but honourd more? Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic Eve, Partake thou also; happie though thou art, Happier thou mayst be, worthier canst not be: Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind, But somtimes in the Air, as wee, somtimes Ascend to Heav'n, by merit thine, and see What life the Gods live there, and such live thou. So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held, Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part Which he had pluckt; the pleasant savourie smell So quick'nd appetite, that I, methought, Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds With him I flew, and underneath beheld The Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wide And various: wondring at my flight and change To this high exaltation; suddenly My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down, And fell asleep; but O how glad I wak'd To find this but a dream! Thus Eve her Night Related, and thus Adam answerd sad. Best Image of my self and dearer half, The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep Affects me equally; nor can I like This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear; Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none, Created pure. But know that in the Soule Are many lesser Faculties that serve Reason as chief; among these Fansie next Her office holds; of all external things, Which the five watchful Senses represent, She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes, Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, frames All what we affirm or what deny, and call Our knowledge or opinion; then retires Into her private Cell when Nature rests. Oft in her absence mimic Fansie wakes To imitate her; but misjoyning shapes, Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams, Ill matching words and deeds long past or late. Som such resemblances methinks I find Of our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream, But with addition strange; yet be not sad. Evil into the mind of God or Man May come and go, so unapprov'd, and leave No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope That what in sleep thou didst abhorr to dream, Waking thou never wilt consent to do. Be not disheart'nd then, nor cloud those looks That wont to be more chearful and serene Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World, And let us to our fresh imployments rise That open now thir choicest bosom'd smells Reservd from night, and kept for thee in store. So cheard he his fair Spouse, and she was cheard, But silently a gentle tear let fall From either eye, and wip'd them with her haire; Two other precious drops that ready stood, Each in thir chrystal sluce, hee ere they fell Kiss'd as the gracious signs of sweet remorse And pious awe, that feard to have offended. So all was cleard, and to the Field they haste. But first from under shadie arborous roof, Soon as they forth were come to open sight Of day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen With wheels yet hov'ring o're the Ocean brim, Shot paralel to the earth his dewie ray, Discovering in wide Lantskip all the East Of Paradise and Edens happie Plains, Lowly they bow'd adoring, and began Thir Orisons, each Morning duly paid In various style, for neither various style Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise Thir Maker, in fit strains pronounc't or sung Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence Flowd from thir lips, in Prose or numerous Verse, More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp To add more sweetness, and they thus began. These are thy glorious works, Parent of good, Almightie, thine this universal Frame, Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then! Unspeakable, who sitst above these Heavens To us invisible or dimly seen In these thy lowest works, yet these declare Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine: Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light, Angels, for yee behold him, and with songs And choral symphonies, Day without Night, Circle his Throne rejoycing, yee in Heav'n, On Earth joyn all yee Creatures to extoll Him first, him last, him midst, and without end. Fairest of Starrs, last in the train of Night, If better thou belong not to the dawn, Sure pledge of day, that crownst the smiling Morn With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Spheare While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime. Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soule, Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise In thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st, And when high Noon hast gaind, & when thou fallst. Moon, that now meetst the orient Sun, now fli'st With the fixt Starrs, fixt in thir Orb that flies, And yee five other wandring Fires that move In mystic Dance not without Song, resound His praise, who out of Darkness call'd up Light. Aire, and ye Elements the eldest birth Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix And nourish all things, let your ceasless change Varie to our great Maker still new praise. Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise From Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or grey, Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold, In honour to the Worlds great Author rise, Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd skie, Or wet the thirstie Earth with falling showers, Rising or falling still advance his praise. His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow, Breath soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines, With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave. Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow, Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise. Joyn voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds, That singing up to Heaven Gate ascend, Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise; Yee that in Waters glide, and yee that walk The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep; Witness if I be silent, Morn or Eeven, To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise. Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still To give us onely good; and if the night Have gathered aught of evil or conceald, Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark. So pray'd they innocent, and to thir thoughts Firm peace recoverd soon and wonted calm. On to thir mornings rural work they haste Among sweet dewes and flours; where any row Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reachd too farr Thir pamperd boughes, and needed hands to check Fruitless imbraces: or they led the Vine To wed her Elm; she spous'd about him twines Her mariageable arms, and with her brings Her dowr th' adopted Clusters, to adorn His barren leaves. Them thus imploid beheld With pittie Heav'ns high King, and to him call'd Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deign'd To travel with Tobias, and secur'd His marriage with the seaventimes-wedded Maid. Raphael, said hee, thou hear'st what stir on Earth Satan from Hell scap't through the darksom Gulf Hath raisd in Paradise, and how disturbd This night the human pair, how he designes In them at once to ruin all mankind. Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend Converse with Adam, in what Bowre or shade Thou find'st him from the heat of Noon retir'd, To respit his day-labour with repast, Or with repose; and such discourse bring on, As may advise him of his happie state, Happiness in his power left free to will, Left to his own free Will, his Will though free, Yet mutable; whence warne him to beware He swerve not too secure: tell him withall His danger, and from whom, what enemie Late falln himself from Heav'n, is plotting now The fall of others from like state of bliss; By violence, no, for that shall be withstood, But by deceit and lies; this let him know, Least wilfully transgressing he pretend Surprisal, unadmonisht, unforewarnd. So spake th' Eternal Father, and fulfilld All Justice: nor delaid the winged Saint After his charge receivd, but from among Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood Vaild with his gorgeous wings, up springing light Flew through the midst of Heav'n; th' angelic Quires On each hand parting, to his speed gave way Through all th' Empyreal road; till at the Gate Of Heav'n arriv'd, the gate self-opend wide On golden Hinges turning, as by work Divine the sov'ran Architect had fram'd. From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight, Starr interpos'd, however small he sees, Not unconform to other shining Globes, Earth and the Gard'n of God, with Cedars crownd Above all Hills. As when by night the Glass Of Galileo, less assur'd, observes Or Pilot from amidst the Cyclades Delos or Samos first appeering kenns A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Skie Sailes between worlds & worlds, with steddie wing Now on the polar windes, then with quick Fann Winnows the buxom Air; till within soare Of Towring Eagles, to all the Fowles he seems A Phoenix, gaz'd by all, as that sole Bird When to enshrine his reliques in the Sun's At once on th' Eastern cliff of Paradise He lights, and to his proper shape returns A Seraph wingd; six wings he wore, to shade His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad Each shoulder broad, came mantling o're his brest With regal Ornament; the middle pair Girt like a Starrie Zone his waste, and round Skirted his loines and thighes with downie Gold And colours dipt in Heav'n; the third his feet Shaddowd from either heele with featherd maile Skie-tinctur'd grain. Like Maia's son he stood, And shook his Plumes, that Heav'nly fragrance filld The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the bands Of Angels under watch; and to his state, And to his message high in honour rise; For on som message high they guessd him bound. Thir glittering Tents he passd, and now is come Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrhe, And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balme; A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here Wantond as in her prime, and plaid at will Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet, Wilde above rule or art; enormous bliss. Him through the spicie Forrest onward com Adam discernd, as in the dore he sat Of his coole Bowre, while now the mounted Sun Shot down direct his fervid Raies, to warme Earths inmost womb, more warmth then Adam need; And Eve within, due at her hour prepar'd For dinner savourie fruits, of taste to please True appetite, and not disrelish thirst Of nectarous draughts between, from milkie stream, Berrie or Grape: to whom thus Adam call'd. Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight behold Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape Comes this way moving; seems another Morn Ris'n on mid-noon; som great behest from Heav'n To us perhaps he brings, and will voutsafe This day to be our Guest. But goe with speed, And what thy stores contain, bring forth and poure Abundance, fit to honour and receive Our Heav'nly stranger; well we may afford Our givers thir own gifts, and large bestow From large bestowd, where Nature multiplies Her fertil growth, and by disburd'ning grows More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare. To whom thus Eve. Adam, earths hallowd mould, Of God inspir'd, small store will serve, where store, All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk; Save what by frugal storing firmness gains To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes: But I will haste and from each bough and break, Each Plant & juciest Gourd will pluck such choice To entertain our Angel guest, as hee Beholding shall confess that here on Earth God hath dispenst his bounties as in Heav'n. So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent What choice to chuse for delicacie best, What order, so contriv'd as not to mix Tastes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bring Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change, Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yeilds In India East or West, or middle shoare In Pontus or the Punic Coast, or where Alcinous reign'd, fruit of all kindes, in coate, Rough, or smooth rin'd, or bearded husk, or shell She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meathes From many a berrie, and from sweet kernels prest She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum'd. Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train Accompani'd then with his own compleat Perfections, in himself was all his state, More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits On Princes, when thir rich Retinue long Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeard with Gold Dazles the croud, and sets them all agape. Neerer his presence Adam though not awd, Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek, As to a superior Nature, bowing low, Thus said. Native of Heav'n, for other place None can then Heav'n such glorious shape contain; Since by descending from the Thrones above, Those happie places thou hast deignd a while To want, and honour these, voutsafe with us Two onely, who yet by sov'ran gift possess This spacious ground, in yonder shadie Bowre To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears To sit and taste, till this meridian heat Be over, and the Sun more coole decline. Whom thus the Angelic Vertue answerd milde. Adam, I therefore came, nor art thou such Created, or such place hast here to dwell, As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heav'n To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bowre Oreshades; for these mid-hours, till Eevning rise I have at will. So to the Silvan Lodge They came, that like Pomona's Arbour smil'd With flourets deck't and fragrant smells; but Eve Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feign'd Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove, Stood to entertain her guest from Heav'n; no vaile Shee needed, Vertue-proof, no thought infirme Alterd her cheek. On whom the Angel Haile Bestowd, the holy salutation us'd Long after to blest Marie, second Eve. Haile Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons Then with these various fruits the Trees of God Have heap'd this Table. Rais'd of grassie terf Thir Table was, and mossie seats had round, And on her ample Square from side to side All Autumn pil'd, though Spring and Autumn here Danc'd hand in hand. A while discourse they hold; No fear lest Dinner coole; when thus began Our Authour. Heav'nly stranger, please to taste These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom All perfet good unmeasur'd out, descends, To us for food and for delight hath caus'd The Earth to yeild; unsavourie food perhaps To spiritual Natures; only this I know, That one Celestial Father gives to all. To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives Whose praise be ever sung to man in part Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found No ingrateful food: and food alike those pure Intelligential substances require As doth your Rational; and both contain Within them every lower facultie Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste, Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate, And corporeal to incorporeal turn. For know, whatever was created, needs To be sustaind and fed; of Elements The grosser feeds the purer, earth the sea, Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon; Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurg'd Vapours not yet into her substance turnd. Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale From her moist Continent to higher Orbes. The Sun that light imparts to all, receives From all his alimental recompence In humid exhalations, and at Even Sups with the Ocean: though in Heav'n the Trees Of life ambrosial frutage bear, and vines Yeild Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn We brush mellifluous Dewes, and find the ground Cover'd with pearly grain: yet God hath here Varied his bounty so with new delights, As may compare with Heaven; and to taste Think not I shall be nice. So down they sat, And to thir viands fell, nor seemingly The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch Of real hunger, and concoctive heate To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire Of sooty coal the Empiric Alchimist Can turn, or holds it possible to turn Metals of drossiest Ore to perfet Gold As from the Mine. Mean while at Table Eve Ministerd naked, and thir flowing cups With pleasant liquors crown'd: O innocence Deserving Paradise! if ever, then, Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin Enamour'd at that sight; but in those hearts Love unlibidinous reign'd, nor jealousie Was understood, the injur'd Lovers Hell. Thus when with meats & drinks they had suffic'd, Not burd'nd Nature, sudden mind arose In Adam, not to let th' occasion pass Given him by this great Conference to know Of things above his World, and of thir being Who dwell in Heav'n, whose excellence he saw Transcend his own so farr, whose radiant forms Divine effulgence, whose high Power so far Exceeded human, and his wary speech Thus to th' Empyreal Minister he fram'd. Inhabitant with God, now know I well Thy favour, in this honour done to man, Under whose lowly roof thou hast voutsaf't To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste, Food not of Angels, yet accepted so, As that more willingly thou couldst not seem At Heav'ns high feasts to have fed: yet what compare? To whom the winged Hierarch repli'd. O Adam, one Almightie is, from whom All things proceed, and up to him return, If not deprav'd from good, created all Such to perfection, one first matter all, Indu'd with various forms, various degrees Of substance, and in things that live, of life; But more refin'd, more spiritous, and pure, As neerer to him plac't or neerer tending Each in thir several active Sphears assignd, Till body up to spirit work, in bounds Proportiond to each kind. So from the root Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves More aerie, last the bright consummate floure Spirits odorous breathes: flours and thir fruit Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublim'd To vital Spirits aspire, to animal, To intellectual, give both life and sense, Fansie and understanding, whence the soule Reason receives, and reason is her being, Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours, Differing but in degree, of kind the same. Wonder not then, what God for you saw good If I refuse not, but convert, as you, To proper substance; time may come when men With Angels may participate, and find No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare: And from these corporal nutriments perhaps Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit Improv'd by tract of time, and wingd ascend Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice Here or in Heav'nly Paradises dwell; If ye be found obedient, and retain Unalterably firm his love entire Whose progenie you are. Mean while enjoy Your fill what happiness this happie state Can comprehend, incapable of more. To whom the Patriarch of mankind repli'd. O favourable spirit, propitious guest, Well hast thou taught the way that might direct Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set From center to circumference, whereon In contemplation of created things By steps we may ascend to God. But say, What meant that caution joind, If Ye Be Found Obedient? can wee want obedience then To him, or possibly his love desert Who formd us from the dust, and plac'd us here Full to the utmost measure of what bliss Human desires can seek or apprehend? To whom the Angel. Son of Heav'n and Earth, Attend: That thou art happie, owe to God; That thou continu'st such, owe to thy self, That is, to thy obedience; therein stand. This was that caution giv'n thee; be advis'd. God made thee perfet, not immutable; And good he made thee, but to persevere He left it in thy power, ordaind thy will By nature free, not over-rul'd by Fate Inextricable, or strict necessity; Our voluntarie service he requires, Not our necessitated, such with him Findes no acceptance, nor can find, for how Can hearts, not free, be tri'd whether they serve Willing or no, who will but what they must By Destinie, and can no other choose? My self and all th' Angelic Host that stand In sight of God enthron'd, our happie state Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds; On other surety none; freely we serve. Because wee freely love, as in our will To love or not; in this we stand or fall: And som are fall'n, to disobedience fall'n, And so from Heav'n to deepest Hell; O fall From what high state of bliss into what woe! To whom our great Progenitor. Thy words Attentive, and with more delighted eare Divine instructer, I have heard, then when Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills Aereal Music send: nor knew I not To be both will and deed created free; Yet that we never shall forget to love Our maker, and obey him whose command Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts Assur'd me and still assure: though what thou tellst Hath past in Heav'n, som doubt within me move, But more desire to hear, if thou consent, The full relation, which must needs be strange, Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard; And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun Hath finisht half his journey, and scarce begins His other half in the great Zone of Heav'n. Thus Adam made request, and Raphael After short pause assenting, thus began. High matter thou injoinst me, O prime of men, Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate To human sense th' invisible exploits Of warring Spirits; how without remorse The ruin of so many glorious once And perfet while they stood; how last unfould The secrets of another world, perhaps Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good This is dispenc't, and what surmounts the reach Of human sense, I shall delineate so, By lik'ning spiritual to corporal forms, As may express them best, though what if Earth Be but the shaddow of Heav'n, and things therein Each to other like, more then on earth is thought? As yet this world was not, and Chaos wilde Reignd where these Heav'ns now rowl, where Earth now rests Upon her Center pois'd, when on a day For Time, though in Eternitie, appli'd To motion, measures all things durable By present, past, and future on such day As Heav'ns great Year brings forth, th' Empyreal Host Of Angels by Imperial summons call'd, Innumerable before th' Almighties Throne Forthwith from all the ends of Heav'n appeerd Under thir Hierarchs in orders bright Ten thousand thousand Ensignes high advanc'd, Standards, and Gonfalons twixt Van and Reare Streame in the Aire, and for distinction serve Or in thir glittering Tissues bear imblaz'd Holy Memorials, acts of Zeale and Love Recorded eminent. Thus when in Orbes Of circuit inexpressible they stood, Orb within Orb, the Father infinite, By whom in bliss imbosom'd sat the Son, Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whose top Brightness had made invisible, thus spake. Hear my Decree, which unrevok't shall stand. This day I have begot whom I declare My onely Son, and on this holy Hill Him have anointed, whom ye now behold At my right hand; your Head I him appoint; And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow All knees in Heav'n, and shall confess him Lord: Under his great Vice-gerent Reign abide United as one individual Soule For ever happie: him who disobeyes Mee disobeyes, breaks union, and that day Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls Into utter darkness, deep ingulft, his place Ordaind without redemption, without end. So spake th' Omnipotent, and with his words All seemd well pleas'd, all seem'd, but were not all. That day, as other solem dayes, they spent In song and dance about the sacred Hill, Mystical dance, which yonder starrie Spheare Of Planets and of fixt in all her Wheeles Resembles nearest, mazes intricate, Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular Then most, when most irregular they seem: And in thir motions harmonie Divine So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear Listens delighted. Eevning approachd For we have also our Eevning and our Morn, We ours for change delectable, not need Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn Desirous, all in Circles as they stood, Tables are set, and on a sudden pil'd With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows: In Pearl, in Diamond, and massie Gold, Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heav'n. They eat, they drink, and with refection sweet Are fill'd, before th' all bounteous King, who showrd With copious hand, rejoycing in thir joy. Now when ambrosial Night with Clouds exhal'd From that high mount of God, whence light & shade Spring both, the face of brightest Heav'n had changd To grateful Twilight for Night comes not there In darker veile and roseat Dews dispos'd All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest, Wide over all the Plain, and wider farr Then all this globous Earth in Plain outspred, Such are the Courts of God Th' Angelic throng Disperst in Bands and Files thir Camp extend By living Streams among the Trees of Life, Pavilions numberless, and sudden reard, Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept Fannd with coole Winds, save those who in thir course Melodious Hymns about the sovran Throne Alternate all night long: but not so wak'd Satan, so call him now, his former name Is heard no more Heav'n; he of the first, If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power, In favour and praeeminence, yet fraught With envie against the Son of God, that day Honourd by his great Father, and proclaimd Messiah King anointed, could not beare Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaird. Deep malice thence conceiving & disdain, Soon as midnight brought on the duskie houre Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolv'd With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave Unworshipt, unobey'd the Throne supream Contemptuous, and his next subordinate Awak'ning, thus to him in secret spake. Sleepst thou Companion dear, what sleep can close Thy eye-lids? and remembrest what Decree Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips Of Heav'ns Almightie. Thou to me thy thoughts Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart; Both waking we were one; how then can now Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou seest impos'd; New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate What doubtful may ensue, more in this place To utter is not safe. Assemble thou Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief; Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night Her shadowie Cloud withdraws, I am to haste, And all who under me thir Banners wave, Homeward with flying march where we possess The Quarters of the North, there to prepare Fit entertainment to receive our King The great Messiah, and his new commands, Who speedily through all the Hierarchies Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws. So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infus'd Bad influence into th' unwarie brest Of his Associate; hee together calls, Or several one by one, the Regent Powers, Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught, That the most High commanding, now ere Night, Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heav'n, The great Hierarchal Standard was to move; Tells the suggested cause, and casts between Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound Or taint integritie; but all obey'd The wonted signal, and superior voice Of thir great Potentate; for great indeed His name, and high was his degree in Heav'n; His count'nance, as the Morning Starr that guides The starrie flock, allur'd them, and with lyes Drew after him the third part of Heav'ns Host: Mean while th' Eternal eye, whose sight discernes Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy Mount And from within the golden Lamps that burne Nightly before him, saw without thir light Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spred Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes Were banded to oppose his high Decree; And smiling to his onely Son thus said. Son, thou in whom my glory I behold In full resplendence, Heir of all my might, Neerly it now concernes us to be sure Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms We mean to hold what anciently we claim Of Deitie or Empire, such a foe Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North; Nor so content, hath in his thought to trie In battel, what our Power is, or our right. Let us advise, and to this hazard draw With speed what force is left, and all imploy In our defence, lest unawares we lose This our high place, our Sanctuarie, our Hill. To whom the Son with calm aspect and cleer Light'ning Divine, ineffable, serene, Made answer. Mightie Father, thou thy foes Justly hast in derision, and secure Laugh'st at thir vain designes and tumults vain, Matter to mee of Glory, whom thir hate Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power Giv'n me to quell thir pride, and in event Know whether I be dextrous to subdue Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heav'n. So spake the Son, but Satan with his Powers Farr was advanc't on winged speed, an Host Or Starrs of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun Impearls on every leaf and every flouer. Regions they pass'd, the mightie Regencies In thir triple Degrees, Regions to which All thy Dominion, Adam, is no more Then what this Garden is to all the Earth, And all the Sea, from one entire globose Stretcht into Longitude; which having pass'd At length into the limits of the North They came, and Satan to his Royal seat High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount Rais'd on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towrs From Diamond Quarries hew'n, & Rocks of Gold, The Palace of great Lucifer, so call Interpreted which not long after, hee Affecting all equality with God, In imitation of that Mount whereon Messiah was declar'd in sight of Heav'n, The Mountain of the Congregation call'd; For thither he assembl'd all his Train, Pretending so commanded to consult About the great reception of thir King, Thither to come, and with calumnious Art Of counterfeted truth thus held thir ears. If these magnific Titles yet remain Not meerly titular, since by Decree Another now hath to himself ingross't All Power, and us eclipst under the name Of King anointed, for whom all this haste Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here, This onely to consult how we may best With what may be devis'd of honours new Receive him coming to receive from us Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile, Too much to one, but double how endur'd, To one and to his image now proclaim'd? But what if better counsels might erect Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke? Will ye submit your necks, and chuse to bend The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust To know ye right, or if ye know your selves Natives and Sons of Heav'n possest before By none, and if not equal all, yet free, Equally free; for Orders and Degrees Jarr not with liberty, but well consist. Who can in reason then or right assume Monarchie over such as live by right His equals, if in power and splendor less, In freedome equal? or can introduce Law and Edict on us, who without law Erre not, much less for this to be our Lord, And look for adoration to th' abuse Of those Imperial Titles which assert Our being ordain'd to govern, not to serve? Thus farr his bold discourse without controule Had audience, when among the Seraphim Abdiel, then whom none with more zeale ador'd The Deitie, and divine commands obei'd, Stood up, and in a flame of zeale severe The current of his fury thus oppos'd. O argument blasphemous, false and proud! Words which no eare ever to hear in Heav'n Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate In place thy self so high above thy Peeres. Canst thou with impious obloquie condemne The just Decree of God, pronounc't and sworn, That to his only Son by right endu'd With Regal Scepter, every Soule in Heav'n Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due Confess him rightful King? unjust thou saist Flatly unjust, to binde with Laws the free, And equal over equals to let Reigne, One over all with unsucceeded power. Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute With him the points of libertie, who made Thee what thou art, & formd the Pow'rs of Heav'n Such as he pleasd, and circumscrib'd thir being? Yet by experience taught we know how good, And of our good, and of our dignitie How provident he is, how farr from thought To make us less, bent rather to exalt Our happie state under one Head more neer United. But to grant it thee unjust, That equal over equals Monarch Reigne: Thy self though great & glorious dost thou count, Or all Angelic Nature joind in one, Equal to him begotten Son, by whom As by his Word the mighty Father made All things, ev'n thee, and all the Spirits of Heav'n By him created in thir bright degrees, Crownd them with Glory, & to thir Glory nam'd Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscur'd, But more illustrious made, since he the Head One of our number thus reduc't becomes, His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage, And tempt not these; but hast'n to appease Th' incensed Father, and th' incensed Son, While Pardon may be found in time besought. So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeale None seconded, as out of season judg'd, Or singular and rash, whereat rejoic'd Th' Apostat, and more haughty thus repli'd. That we were formd then saist thou? & the work Of secondarie hands, by task transferd From Father to his Son? strange point and new! Doctrin which we would know whence learnt: who saw When this creation was? rememberst thou Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being? We know no time when we were not as now; Know none before us, self-begot, self-rais'd By our own quick'ning power, when fatal course Had circl'd his full Orbe, the birth mature Of this our native Heav'n, Ethereal Sons. Our puissance is our own, our own right hand Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold Whether by supplication we intend Address, and to begirt th' Almighty Throne Beseeching or besieging. This report, These tidings carrie to th' anointed King; And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. He said, and as the sound of waters deep Hoarce murmur echo'd to his words applause Through the infinite Host, nor less for that The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone Encompass'd round with foes, thus answerd bold. O alienate from God, O spirit accurst, Forsak'n of all good; I see thy fall Determind, and thy hapless crew involv'd In this perfidious fraud, contagion spred Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth No more be troubl'd how to quit the yoke Of Gods Messiah; those indulgent Laws Will not be now voutsaf't, other Decrees Against thee are gon forth without recall; That Golden Scepter which thou didst reject Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and breake Thy disobedience. Well thou didst advise, Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrauth Impendent, raging into sudden flame Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire. Then who created thee lamenting learne, When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know. So spake the Seraph Abdiel faithful found, Among the faithless, faithful only hee; Among innumerable false, unmov'd, Unshak'n, unseduc'd, unterrifi'd His Loyaltie he kept, his Love, his Zeale; Nor number, nor example with him wrought To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind Though single. From amidst them forth he passd, Long way through hostile scorn, which he susteind Superior, nor of violence fear'd aught; And with retorted scorn his back he turn'd On those proud Towrs to swift destruction doom'd. They eate, they drink, and in communion sweet Quaff immortalitie and joy, secure Of surfet where full measure onely bounds Excess, before th'all bounteous King, who showrd . All night the dreadless Angel unpursu'd Through Heav'ns wide Champain held his way, till Morn, Wak't by the circling Hours, with rosie hand Unbarr'd the gates of Light. There is a Cave Within the Mount of God, fast by his Throne, Where light and darkness in perpetual round Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heav'n Grateful vicissitude, like Day and Night; Light issues forth, and at the other dore Obsequious darkness enters, till her houre To veile the Heav'n, though darkness there might well Seem twilight here; and now went forth the Morn Such as in highest Heav'n, arrayd in Gold Empyreal, from before her vanisht Night, Shot through with orient Beams: when all the Plain Coverd with thick embatteld Squadrons bright, Chariots and flaming Armes, and fierie Steeds Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view: Warr he perceav'd, warr in procinct, and found Already known what he for news had thought To have reported: gladly then he mixt Among those friendly Powers who him receav'd With joy and acclamations loud, that one That of so many Myriads fall'n, yet one Returnd not lost: On to the sacred hill They led him high applauded, and present Before the seat supream; from whence a voice From midst a Golden Cloud thus milde was heard. Servant of God, well done, well hast thou fought The better fight, who single hast maintaind Against revolted multitudes the Cause Of Truth, in word mightier then they in Armes; And for the testimonie of Truth hast born Universal reproach, far worse to beare Then violence: for this was all thy care To stand approv'd in sight of God, though Worlds Judg'd thee perverse: the easier conquest now Remains thee, aided by this host of friends, Back on thy foes more glorious to return Then scornd thou didst depart, and to subdue By force, who reason for thir Law refuse, Right reason for thir Law, and for thir King Messiah, who by right of merit Reigns. And thou in Military prowess next Gabriel, lead forth to Battel these my Sons Invincible, lead forth my armed Saints By Thousands and by Millions rang'd for fight; Equal in number to that Godless crew Rebellious, them with Fire and hostile Arms Fearless assault, and to the brow of Heav'n Pursuing drive them out from God and bliss, Into thir place of punishment, the Gulf Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide His fiery Chaos to receave thir fall. So spake the Sovran voice, and Clouds began To darken all the Hill, and smoak to rowl In duskie wreathes, reluctant flames, the signe Of wrauth awak't: nor with less dread the loud Ethereal Trumpet from on high gan blow: At which command the Powers Militant, That stood for Heav'n, in mighty Quadrate joyn'd Of Union irresistible, mov'd on In silence thir bright Legions, to the sound Of instrumental Harmonie that breath'd Heroic Ardor to advent'rous deeds Under thir God-like Leaders, in the Cause Of God and his Messiah. On they move Indissolubly firm; nor obvious Hill, Nor streit'ning Vale, nor Wood, nor Stream divides Thir perfet ranks; for high above the ground Thir march was, and the passive Air upbore Thir nimble tread; as when the total kind Of Birds in orderly array on wing Came summond over Eden to receive Thir names of thee; so over many a tract Of Heav'n they march'd, and many a Province wide Tenfold the length of this terrene: at last Farr in th' Horizon to the North appeer'd From skirt to skirt a fierie Region, stretcht In battailous aspect, and neerer view Bristl'd with upright beams innumerable Of rigid Spears, and Helmets throng'd, and Shields Various, with boastful Argument portraid, The banded Powers of Satan hasting on With furious expedition; for they weend That self same day by fight, or by surprize To set the envier of his State, the proud Aspirer, but thir thoughts prov'd fond and vain In the mid way: though strange to us it seemd At first, that Angel should with Angel warr, And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet So oft in Festivals of joy and love Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire Hymning th' Eternal Father: but the shout Of Battel now began, and rushing sound Of onset ended soon each milder thought. High in the midst exalted as a God Th' Apostat in his Sun-bright Chariot sate Idol of Majestie Divine, enclos'd With Flaming Cherubim, and golden Shields; Then lighted from his gorgeous Throne, for now 'Twixt Host and Host but narrow space was left, A dreadful interval, and Front to Front Presented stood in terrible array Of hideous length: before the cloudie Van, On the rough edge of battel ere it joyn'd, Satan with vast and haughtie strides advanc't, Came towring, armd in Adamant and Gold; Abdiel that sight endur'd not, where he stood Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds, And thus his own undaunted heart explores. O Heav'n! that such resemblance of the Highest Should yet remain, where faith and realtie Remain not; wherfore should not strength & might There fail where Vertue fails, or weakest prove Where boldest; though to sight unconquerable? His puissance, trusting in th' Almightie's aide, I mean to try, whose Reason I have tri'd Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just, That he who in debate of Truth hath won, Should win in Arms, in both disputes alike Victor; though brutish that contest and foule, When Reason hath to deal with force, yet so Most reason is that Reason overcome. So pondering, and from his armed Peers Forth stepping opposite, half way he met His daring foe, at this prevention more Incens't, and thus securely him defi'd. Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reacht The highth of thy aspiring unoppos'd, The Throne of God unguarded, and his side Abandond at the terror of thy Power Or potent tongue; fool, not to think how vain Against th' Omnipotent to rise in Arms; Who out of smallest things could without end Have rais'd incessant Armies to defeat Thy folly; or with solitarie hand Reaching beyond all limit, at one blow Unaided could have finisht thee, and whelmd Thy Legions under darkness; but thou seest All are not of thy Train; there be who Faith Prefer, and Pietie to God, though then To thee not visible, when I alone Seemd in thy World erroneous to dissent From all: my Sect thou seest, now learn too late How few somtimes may know, when thousands err. Whom the grand foe with scornful eye askance Thus answerd. Ill for thee, but in wisht houre Of my revenge, first sought for thou returnst From flight, seditious Angel, to receave Thy merited reward, the first assay Of this right hand provok't, since first that tongue Inspir'd with contradiction durst oppose A third part of the Gods, in Synod met Thir Deities to assert, who while they feel Vigour Divine within them, can allow Omnipotence to none. But well thou comst Before thy fellows, ambitious to win From me som Plume, that thy success may show Destruction to the rest: this pause between Unanswerd least thou boast to let thee know; At first I thought that Libertie and Heav'n To heav'nly Soules had bin all one; but now I see that most through sloth had rather serve, Ministring Spirits, traind up in Feast and Song; Such hast thou arm'd, the Minstrelsie of Heav'n, Servilitie with freedom to contend, As both thir deeds compar'd this day shall prove. To whom in brief thus Abdiel stern repli'd. Apostat, still thou errst, nor end wilt find Of erring, from the path of truth remote: Unjustly thou deprav'st it with the name Of Servitude to serve whom God ordains, Or Nature; God and Nature bid the same, When he who rules is worthiest, and excells Them whom he governs. This is servitude, To serve th' unwise, or him who hath rebelld Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee, Thy self not free, but to thy self enthrall'd; Yet leudly dar'st our ministring upbraid. Reign thou in Hell thy Kingdom, let mee serve In Heav'n God ever blessed, and his Divine Behests obey, worthiest to be obey'd, Yet Chains in Hell, not Realms expect: mean while From mee returnd, as erst thou saidst, from flight, This greeting on thy impious Crest receive. So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high, Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell On the proud Crest of Satan, that no sight, Nor motion of swift thought, less could his Shield Such ruin intercept: ten paces huge He back recoild; the tenth on bended knee His massie Spear upstaid; as if on Earth Winds under ground or waters forcing way Sidelong, had push't a Mountain from his seat Half sunk with all his Pines. Amazement seis'd The Rebel Thrones, but greater rage to see Thus foil'd thir mightiest, ours joy filld, and shout, Presage of Victorie and fierce desire Of Battel: whereat Michael bid sound Th' Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heav'n It sounded, and the faithful Armies rung Hosanna to the Highest: nor stood at gaze The adverse Legions, nor less hideous joyn'd The horrid shock: now storming furie rose, And clamour such as heard in Heav'n till now Was never, Arms on Armour clashing bray'd Horrible discord, and the madding Wheeles Of brazen Chariots rag'd; dire was the noise Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss Of fiery Darts in flaming volies flew, And flying vaulted either Host with fire. Sounder fierie Cope together rush'd Both Battels maine, with ruinous assault And inextinguishable rage; all Heav'n Resounded, and had Earth bin then, all Earth Had to her Center shook. What wonder? when Millions of fierce encountring Angels fought On either side, the least of whom could weild These Elements, and arm him with the force Of all thir Regions: how much more of Power Armie against Armie numberless to raise Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb, Though not destroy, thir happie Native seat; From his strong hold of Heav'n high over-rul'd And limited thir might; though numberd such As each divided Legion might have seemd A numerous Host, in strength each armed hand A Legion; led in fight, yet Leader seemd Each Warriour single as in Chief, expert When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway Of Battel, open when, and when to close The ridges of grim Warr; no thought of flight, None of retreat, no unbecoming deed That argu'd fear; each on himself reli'd, As onely in his arm the moment lay Of victorie; deeds of eternal fame Were don, but infinite: for wide was spred That Warr and various; somtimes on firm ground A standing fight, then soaring on main wing Tormented all the Air; all Air seemd then Conflicting Fire: long time in eeven scale The Battel hung; till Satan, who that day Prodigious power had shewn, and met in Armes No equal, raunging through the dire attack Of fighting Seraphim confus'd, at length Saw where the Sword of Michael smote, and fell'd Squadrons at once, with huge two-handed sway Brandisht aloft the horrid edge came down Wide wasting; such destruction to withstand He hasted, and oppos'd the rockie Orb Of tenfold Adamant, his ample Shield A vast circumference: At his approach The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toile Surceas'd, and glad as hoping here to end Intestine War in Heav'n, the arch foe subdu'd Or Captive drag'd in Chains, with hostile frown And visage all enflam'd first thus began. Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt, Unnam'd in Heav'n, now plenteous, as thou seest These Acts of hateful strife, hateful to all, Though heaviest by just measure on thy self And thy adherents: how hast thou disturb'd Heav'ns blessed peace, and into Nature brought Miserie, uncreated till the crime Of thy Rebellion? how hast thou instill'd Thy malice into thousands, once upright And faithful, now prov'd false. But think not here To trouble Holy Rest; Heav'n casts thee out From all her Confines. Heav'n the seat of bliss Brooks not the works of violence and Warr. Hence then, and evil go with thee along Thy ofspring, to the place of evil, Hell, Thou and thy wicked crew; there mingle broiles, Ere this avenging Sword begin thy doome, Or som more sudden vengeance wing'd from God Precipitate thee with augmented paine. So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus The Adversarie. Nor think thou with wind Of airie threats to aw whom yet with deeds Thou canst not. Hast thou turnd the least of these To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise Unvanquisht, easier to transact with mee That thou shouldst hope, imperious, & with threats To chase me hence? erre not that so shall end The strife which thou call'st evil, but wee style The strife of Glorie: which we mean to win, Or turn this Heav'n it self into the Hell Thou fablest, here however to dwell free, If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force, And join him nam'd Almightie to thy aid, I flie not, but have sought thee farr and nigh. They ended parle, and both addrest for fight Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue Of Angels, can relate, or to what things Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift Human imagination to such highth Of Godlike Power: for likest Gods they seemd, Stood they or mov'd, in stature, motion, arms Fit to decide the Empire of great Heav'n. Now wav'd thir fierie Swords, and in the Aire Made horrid Circles; two broad Suns thir Shields Blaz'd opposite, while expectation stood In horror; from each hand with speed retir'd Where erst was thickest fight, th' Angelic throng, And left large field, unsafe within the wind Of such commotion, such as to set forth Great things by small, If Natures concord broke, Among the Constellations warr were sprung, Two Planets rushing from aspect maligne Of fiercest opposition in mid Skie, Should combat, and thir jarring Sphears confound. Together both with next to Almightie Arme, Uplifted imminent one stroke they aim'd That might determine, and not need repeate, As not of power, at once; nor odds appeerd In might or swift prevention; but the sword Of Michael from the Armorie of God Was giv'n him temperd so, that neither keen Nor solid might resist that edge: it met The sword of Satan with steep force to smite Descending, and in half cut sheere, nor staid, But with swift wheele reverse, deep entring shar'd All his right side; then Satan first knew pain, And writh'd him to and fro convolv'd; so sore The griding sword with discontinuous wound Pass'd through him, but th' Ethereal substance clos'd Not long divisible, and from the gash A stream of Nectarous humor issuing flow'd Sanguin, such as Celestial Spirits may bleed, And all his Armour staind ere while so bright. Forthwith on all sides to his aide was run By Angels many and strong, who interpos'd Defence, while others bore him on thir Shields Back to his Chariot; where it stood retir'd From off the files of warr; there they him laid Gnashing for anguish and despite and shame To find himself not matchless, and his pride Humbl'd by such rebuke, so farr beneath His confidence to equal God in power. Yet soon he heal'd; for Spirits that live throughout Vital in every part, not as frail man Cannot but by annihilating die; Nor in thir liquid texture mortal wound Receive, no more then can the fluid Aire: All Heart they live, all Head, all Eye, all Eare, All Intellect, all Sense, and as they please, They Limb themselves, and colour, shape or size Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare. Mean while in other parts like deeds deservd Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought, And with fierce Ensignes pierc'd the deep array Of Moloc furious King, who him defi'd, And at his Chariot wheeles to drag him bound Threatn'd, nor from the Holie One of Heav'n Refrein'd his tongue blasphemous; but anon Down clov'n to the waste, with shatterd Armes And uncouth paine fled bellowing. On each wing Uriel and Raphael his vaunting foe, Though huge, and in a Rock of Diamond Armd, Vanquish'd Adramelec, and Asmadai, Two potent Thrones, that to be less then Gods Disdain'd, but meaner thoughts learnd in thir flight, Mangl'd with gastly wounds through Plate and Maile. Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy The Atheist crew, but with redoubl'd blow Ariel and Arioc, and the violence Of Ramiel scorcht and blasted overthrew. I might relate of thousands, and thir names Eternize here on Earth; but those elect Angels contented with thir fame in Heav'n Seek not the praise of men: the other sort In might though wondrous and in Acts of Warr, Nor of Renown less eager, yet by doome Canceld from Heav'n and sacred memorie, Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell. For strength from Truth divided and from Just, Illaudable, naught merits but dispraise And ignominie, yet to glorie aspires Vain glorious, and through infamie seeks fame: Therfore Eternal silence be thir doome. And now thir mightiest quelld, the battel swerv'd, With many an inrode gor'd; deformed rout Enter'd, and foul disorder; all the ground With shiverd armour strow'n, and on a heap Chariot and Charioter lay overturnd And fierie foaming Steeds; what stood, recoyld Orewearied, through the faint Satanic Host Defensive scarse, or with pale fear surpris'd, Then first with fear surpris'd and sense of paine Fled ignominious, to such evil brought By sinne of disobedience, till that hour Not liable to fear or flight or paine. Far otherwise th' inviolable Saints In Cubic Phalanx firm advanc't entire, Invulnerable, impenitrably arm'd: Such high advantages thir innocence Gave them above thir foes, not to have sinnd, Not to have disobei'd; in fight they stood Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pain'd By wound, though from thir place by violence mov'd. Now Night her course began, and over Heav'n Inducing darkness, grateful truce impos'd, And silence on the odious dinn of Warr: Under her Cloudie covert both retir'd, Victor and Vanquisht: on the foughten field Michael and his Angels prevalent Encamping, plac'd in Guard thir Watches round, Cherubic waving fires: on th' other part Satan with his rebellious disappeerd, Far in the dark dislodg'd, and void of rest, His Potentates to Councel call'd by night; And in the midst thus undismai'd began. O now in danger tri'd, now known in Armes Not to be overpowerd, Companions deare, Found worthy not of Libertie alone, Too mean pretense, but what we more affect, Honour, Dominion, Glorie, and renowne, Who have sustaind one day in doubtful fight, And if one day, why not Eternal dayes? What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send Against us from about his Throne, and judg'd Sufficient to subdue us to his will, But proves not so: then fallible, it seems, Of future we may deem him, though till now Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly arm'd, Some disadvantage we endur'd and paine, Till now not known, but known as soon contemnd, Since now we find this our Empyreal forme Incapable of mortal injurie Imperishable, and though peirc'd with wound, Soon closing, and by native vigour heal'd. Of evil then so small as easie think The remedie; perhaps more valid Armes, Weapons more violent, when next we meet, May serve to better us, and worse our foes, Or equal what between us made the odds, In Nature none: if other hidden cause Left them Superiour, while we can preserve Unhurt our mindes, and understanding sound, Due search and consultation will disclose. He sat; and in th' assembly next upstood Nisroc, of Principalities the prime; As one he stood escap't from cruel fight, Sore toild, his riv'n Armes to havoc hewn, And cloudie in aspect thus answering spake. Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard For Gods, and too unequal work we find Against unequal armes to fight in paine, Against unpaind, impassive; from which evil Ruin must needs ensue; for what availes Valour or strength, though matchless, quelld with pain Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands Of Mightiest. Sense of pleasure we may well Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine, But live content, which is the calmest life: But pain is perfet miserie, the worst Of evils, and excessive, overturnes All patience. He who therefore can invent With what more forcible we may offend Our yet unwounded Enemies, or arme Our selves with like defence, to mee deserves No less then for deliverance what we owe. Whereto with look compos'd Satan repli'd. Not uninvented that, which thou aright Beleivst so main to our success, I bring; Which of us who beholds the bright surface Of this Ethereous mould whereon we stand, This continent of spacious Heav'n, adornd Whose Eye so superficially surveyes These things, as not to mind from whence they grow Deep under ground, materials dark and crude, Of spiritous and fierie spume, till toucht With Heav'ns ray, and temperd they shoot forth So beauteous, op'ning to the ambient light. These in thir dark Nativitie the Deep Shall yeild us, pregnant with infernal flame, Which into hallow Engins long and round Thick-rammd, at th' other bore with touch of fire Dilated and infuriate shall send forth From far with thundring noise among our foes Such implements of mischief as shall dash To pieces, and orewhelm whatever stands Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmd The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt. Nor long shall be our labour, yet ere dawne, Effect shall end our wish. Mean while revive; Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joind Think nothing hard, much less to be despaird. He ended, and his words thir drooping chere Enlightn'd, and thir languisht hope reviv'd. Th' invention all admir'd, and each, how hee To be th' inventer miss'd, so easie it seemd Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought Impossible: yet haply of thy Race In future dayes, if Malice should abound, Some one intent on mischief, or inspir'd With dev'lish machination might devise Like instrument to plague the Sons of men For sin, on warr and mutual slaughter bent. Forthwith from Councel to the work they flew, None arguing stood, innumerable hands Were ready, in a moment up they turnd Wide the Celestial soile, and saw beneath Th' originals of Nature in thir crude They found, they mingl'd, and with suttle Art, Concocted and adusted they reduc'd To blackest grain, and into store conveyd: Part hidd'n veins diggd up nor hath this Earth Entrails unlike of Mineral and Stone, Whereof to found thir Engins and thir Balls Of missive ruin; part incentive reed Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. So all ere day spring, under conscious Night Secret they finish'd, and in order set, With silent circumspection unespi'd. Now when fair Morn Orient in Heav'n appeerd Up rose the Victor Angels, and to Arms The matin Trumpet Sung: in Arms they stood Of Golden Panoplie, refulgent Host, Soon banded; others from the dawning Hills Lookd round, and Scouts each Coast light-armed scoure, Each quarter, to descrie the distant foe, Where lodg'd, or whither fled, or if for fight, In motion or in alt: him soon they met Under spred Ensignes moving nigh, in slow But firm Battalion; back with speediest Sail Zephiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing, Came flying, and in mid Aire aloud thus cri'd. Arme, Warriours, Arme for fight, the foe at hand, Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit This day, fear not his flight; so thick a Cloud He comes, and settl'd in his face I see Sad resolution and secure: let each His Adamantine coat gird well, and each Fit well his Helme, gripe fast his orbed Shield, Born eevn or high, for this day will pour down, If I conjecture aught, no drizling showr, But ratling storm of Arrows barbd with fire. So warnd he them aware themselves, and soon In order, quit of all impediment; Instant without disturb they took Allarm, And onward move Embattelld; when behold Not distant far with heavie pace the Foe Approaching gross and huge; in hollow Cube Training his devilish Enginrie, impal'd On every side with shaddowing Squadrons Deep, To hide the fraud. At interview both stood A while, but suddenly at head appeerd Satan: And thus was heard Commanding loud. Vangard, to Right and Left the Front unfould; That all may see who hate us, how we seek Peace and composure, and with open brest Stand readie to receive them, if they like Our overture, and turn not back perverse; But that I doubt, however witness Heaven, Heav'n witness thou anon, while we discharge Freely our part: yee who appointed stand Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch What we propound, and loud that all may hear. So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce Had ended; when to Right and Left the Front Divided, and to either Flank retir'd. Which to our eyes discoverd new and strange, A triple-mounted row of Pillars laid On Wheels for like to Pillars most they seem'd Or hollow'd bodies made of Oak or Firr With branches lopt, in Wood or Mountain fell'd Brass, Iron, Stonie mould, had not thir mouthes With hideous orifice gap't on us wide, Portending hollow truce; at each behind A Seraph stood, and in his hand a Reed Stood waving tipt with fire; while we suspense, Collected stood within our thoughts amus'd, Not long, for sudden all at once thir Reeds Put forth, and to a narrow vent appli'd With nicest touch. Immediate in a flame, But soon obscur'd with smoak, all Heav'n appeerd, From those deep-throated Engins belcht, whose roar Emboweld with outragious noise the Air, And all her entrails tore, disgorging foule Thir devillish glut, chaind Thunderbolts and Hail Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host Level'd, with such impetuous furie smote, That whom they hit, none on thir feet might stand, Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rowl'd; The sooner for thir Arms, unarm'd they might Have easily as Spirits evaded swift By quick contraction or remove; but now Foule dissipation follow'd and forc't rout; Nor serv'd it to relax thir serried files. What should they do? if on they rusht, repulse Repeated, and indecent overthrow Doubl'd, would render them yet more despis'd, And to thir foes a laughter; for in view Stood rankt of Seraphim another row In posture to displode thir second tire Of Thunder: back defeated to return They worse abhorr'd. Satan beheld thir plight, And to his Mates thus in derision call'd. O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud? Ere while they fierce were coming, and when wee, To entertain them fair with open Front And Brest, what could we more? propounded terms Of composition, strait they chang'd thir minds, Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell, As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemd Somwhat extravagant and wilde, perhaps For joy of offerd peace: but I suppose If our proposals once again were heard We should compel them to a quick result. To whom thus Belial in like gamesom mood. Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight, Of hard contents, and full of force urg'd home, Such as we might perceive amus'd them all, And stumbl'd many, who receives them right, Had need from head to foot well understand; Not understood, this gift they have besides, They shew us when our foes walk not upright. So they among themselves in pleasant veine Stood scoffing, highthn'd in thir thoughts beyond All doubt of Victorie, eternal might To match with thir inventions they presum'd So easie, and of his Thunder made a scorn, And all his Host derided, while they stood A while in trouble; but they stood not long, Rage prompted them at length, & found them arms Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose. Forthwith behold the excellence, the power Which God hath in his mighty Angels plac'd Thir Arms away they threw, and to the Hills For Earth hath this variety from Heav'n Of pleasure situate in Hill and Dale Light as the Lightning glimps they ran, they flew, From thir foundations loosning to and fro They pluckt the seated Hills with all thir load, Rocks, Waters, Woods, and by the shaggie tops Up lifting bore them in thir hands: Amaze, Be sure, and terrour seis'd the rebel Host, When coming towards them so dread they saw The bottom of the Mountains upward turn'd, Till on those cursed Engins triple-row They saw them whelmd, and all thir confidence Under the weight of Mountains buried deep, Themselves invaded next, and on thir heads Main Promontories flung, which in the Air Came shadowing, and opprest whole Legions arm'd, Thir armor help'd thir harm, crush't in and brus'd Into thir substance pent, which wrought them pain Implacable, and many a dolorous groan, Long strugling underneath, ere they could wind Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light, Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown. The rest in imitation to like Armes Betook them, and the neighbouring Hills uptore; So Hills amid the Air encounterd Hills Hurl'd to and fro with jaculation dire, That under ground they fought in dismal shade; Infernal noise; Warr seem'd a civil Game To this uproar; horrid confusion heapt Upon confusion rose: and now all Heav'n Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspred, Had not th' Almightie Father where he sits Shrin'd in his Sanctuarie of Heav'n secure, Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen This tumult, and permitted all, advis'd: That his great purpose he might so fulfill, To honour his Anointed Son aveng'd Upon his enemies, and to declare All power on him transferr'd: whence to his Son Th' Assessor of his Throne he thus began. Effulgence of my Glorie, Son belov'd, Son in whose face invisible is beheld Visibly, what by Deitie I am, And in whose hand what by Decree I doe, Second Omnipotence, two dayes are past, Two dayes, as we compute the dayes of Heav'n, Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame These disobedient; sore hath been thir fight, As likeliest was, when two such Foes met arm'd; For to themselves I left them, and thou knowst, Equal in their Creation they were form'd, Save what sin hath impaird, which yet hath wrought Insensibly, for I suspend thir doom; Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last Endless, and no solution will be found: Warr wearied hath perform'd what Warr can do, And to disorder'd rage let loose the reines, With Mountains as with Weapons arm'd, which makes Wild work in Heav'n, and dangerous to the maine. Two dayes are therefore past, the third is thine; For thee I have ordain'd it, and thus farr Have sufferd, that the Glorie may be thine Of ending this great Warr, since none but Thou Can end it. Into thee such Vertue and Grace Immense I have transfus'd, that all may know In Heav'n and Hell thy Power above compare, And this perverse Commotion governd thus, To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir Of all things, to be Heir and to be King By Sacred Unction, thy deserved right. Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might, Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheeles That shake Heav'ns basis, bring forth all my Warr, Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh; Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out From all Heav'ns bounds into the utter Deep: There let them learn, as likes them, to despise God and Messiah his anointed King. He said, and on his Son with Rayes direct Shon full, he all his Father full exprest Ineffably into his face receiv'd, And thus the filial Godhead answering spake. O Father, O Supream of heav'nly Thrones, First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou alwayes seekst To glorifie thy Son, I alwayes thee, As is most just; this I my Glorie account, My exaltation, and my whole delight, That thou in me well pleas'd, declarst thy will Fulfill'd, which to fulfil is all my bliss. Scepter and Power, thy giving, I assume, And gladlier shall resign, when in the end Thou shalt be All in All, and I in thee For ever, and in mee all whom thou lov'st: But whom thou hat'st, I hate, and can put on Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on, Image of thee in all things; and shall soon, Armd with thy might, rid heav'n of these rebell'd, To thir prepar'd ill Mansion driven down To chains of Darkness, and th' undying Worm, That from thy just obedience could revolt, Whom to obey is happiness entire. Then shall thy Saints unmixt, and from th' impure Farr separate, circling thy holy Mount Unfained Halleluiahs to thee sing, Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief. So said, he o're his Scepter bowing, rose From the right hand of Glorie where he sate, And the third sacred Morn began to shine Dawning through Heav'n: forth rush'd with whirlwind sound Flashing thick flames, Wheele within Wheele undrawn, It self instinct with Spirit, but convoyd By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each Had wondrous, as with Starrs thir bodies all And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the Wheels Of Beril, and careering Fires between; Over thir heads a chrystal Firmament, Whereon a Saphir Throne, inlaid with pure Amber, and colours of the showrie Arch. Hee in Celestial Panoplie all armd Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought, Ascended, at his right hand Victorie Sate Eagle-wing'd, beside him hung his Bow And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stor'd, And from about him fierce Effusion rowld Of smoak and bickering flame, and sparkles dire; Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints, He onward came, farr off his coming shon, And twentie thousand I thir number heard Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen: Hee on the wings of Cherub rode sublime On the Crystallin Skie, in Saphir Thron'd. Illustrious farr and wide, but by his own First seen, them unexpected joy surpriz'd, When the great Ensign of Messiah blaz'd Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heav'n: Under whose Conduct Michael soon reduc'd His Armie, circumfus'd on either Wing, Under thir Head imbodied all in one. Before him Power Divine his way prepar'd; At his command the uprooted Hills retir'd Each to his place, they heard his voice and went Obsequious, Heav'n his wonted face renewd, And with fresh Flourets Hill and Valley smil'd. This saw his hapless Foes, but stood obdur'd, And to rebellious fight rallied thir Powers Insensate, hope conceiving from despair. In heav'nly Spirits could such perverseness dwell? But to convince the proud what Signs availe, Or Wonders move th' obdurate to relent? They hard'nd more by what might most reclame, Grieving to see his Glorie, at the sight Took envie, and aspiring to his highth, Stood reimbattell'd fierce, by force or fraud Weening to prosper, and at length prevaile Against God and Messiah, or to fall In universal ruin last, and now To final Battel drew, disdaining flight, Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God To all his Host on either hand thus spake. Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here stand Ye Angels arm'd, this day from Battel rest; Faithful hath been your Warfare, and of God Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause, And as ye have receivd, so have ye don Invincibly; but of this cursed crew The punishment to other hand belongs, Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints; Number to this dayes work is not ordain'd Nor multitude, stand onely and behold Gods indignation on these Godless pourd By mee; not you but mee they have despis'd, Yet envied; against mee is all thir rage, Because the Father, t' whom in Heav'n supream Kingdom and Power and Glorie appertains, Hath honourd me according to his will. Therefore to mee thir doom he hath assig'n'd; That they may have thir wish, to trie with mee In Battel which the stronger proves, they all, Or I alone against them, since by strength They measure all, of other excellence Not emulous, nor care who them excells; Nor other strife with them do I voutsafe. So spake the Son, and into terrour chang'd His count'nance too severe to be beheld And full of wrauth bent on his Enemies. At once the Four spred out thir Starrie wings With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbes Of his fierce Chariot rowld, as with the sound Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host. Hee on his impious Foes right onward drove, Gloomie as Night; under his burning Wheeles The stedfast Empyrean shook throughout, All but the Throne it self of God. Full soon Among them he arriv'd; in his right hand Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent Before him, such as in thir Soules infix'd Plagues; they astonisht all resistance lost, All courage; down thir idle weapons drop'd; O're Shields and Helmes, and helmed heads he rode Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate, That wish'd the Mountains now might be again Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire. Nor less on either side tempestuous fell His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd Foure, Distinct with eyes, and from the living Wheels, Distinct alike with multitude of eyes, One Spirit in them rul'd, and every eye Glar'd lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire Among th' accurst, that witherd all thir strength, And of thir wonted vigour left them draind, Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fall'n. Yet half his strength he put not forth, but check'd His Thunder in mid Volie, for he meant Not to destroy, but root them out of Heav'n: The overthrown he rais'd, and as a Heard Of Goats or timerous flock together throngd Drove them before him Thunder-struck, pursu'd With terrors and with furies to the bounds And Chrystall wall of Heav'n, which op'ning wide, Rowld inward, and a spacious Gap disclos'd Into the wastful Deep; the monstrous sight Strook them with horror backward, but far worse Urg'd them behind; headlong themselvs they threw Down from the verge of Heav'n, Eternal wrauth Burnt after them to the bottomless pit. Hell heard th' unsufferable noise, Hell saw Heav'n ruining from Heav'n and would have fled Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound. Nine dayes they fell; confounded Chaos roard, And felt tenfold confusion in thir fall Through his wilde Anarchie, so huge a rout Incumberd him with ruin: Hell at last Yawning receavd them whole, and on them clos'd, Hell thir fit habitation fraught with fire Unquenchable, the house of woe and paine. Disburd'nd Heav'n rejoic'd, and soon repaird Her mural breach, returning whence it rowld. Sole Victor from th' expulsion of his Foes Messiah his triumphal Chariot turnd: To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood Eye witnesses of his Almightie Acts, With Jubilie advanc'd; and as they went, Shaded with branching Palme, each order bright, Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King, Son, Heire, and Lord, to him Dominion giv'n, Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode Triumphant through mid Heav'n, into the Courts And Temple of his mightie Father Thron'd On high; who into Glorie him receav'd, Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss. Thus measuring things in Heav'n by things on Earth At thy request, and that thou maist beware By what is past, to thee I have reveal'd What might have else to human Race bin hid; The discord which befel, and Warr in Heav'n Among th' Angelic Powers, and the deep fall Of those too high aspiring, who rebelld With Satan, hee who envies now thy state, Who now is plotting how he may seduce Thee also from obedience, that with him Bereavd of happiness thou maist partake His punishment, Eternal miserie; Which would be all his solace and revenge, As a despite don against the most High, Thee once to gaine Companion of his woe. But list'n not to his Temptations, warne Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard By terrible Example the reward Of disobedience; firm they might have stood, Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress. Descend from Heav'n Urania, by that name If rightly thou art call'd, whose Voice divine Following, above th' Olympian Hill I soare, Above the flight of Pegasean wing. The meaning, not the Name I call: for thou Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top Of old Olympus dwell'st, but Heav'nlie borne, Before the Hills appeerd, or Fountain flow'd, Thou with Eternal wisdom didst converse, Wisdom thy Sister, and with her didst play In presence of th' Almightie Father, pleas'd With thy Celestial Song. Up led by thee Into the Heav'n of Heav'ns I have presum'd, An Earthlie Guest, and drawn Empyreal Aire, Thy tempring; with like safetie guided down Least from this flying Steed unrein'd, as once Bellerophon, though from a lower Clime Dismounted, on th' Aleian Field I fall Erroneous, there to wander and forlorne. Half yet remaines unsung, but narrower bound Within the visible Diurnal Spheare; Standing on Earth, not rapt above the Pole, More safe I Sing with mortal voice, unchang'd To hoarce or mute, though fall'n on evil dayes, On evil dayes though fall'n, and evil tongues; In darkness, and with dangers compast round, And solitude; yet not alone, while thou Visit'st my slumbers Nightly, or when Morn Purples the East: still govern thou my Song, Urania, and fit audience find, though few. But drive farr off the barbarous dissonance Of that wilde Rout that tore the Thracian Bard In Rhodope, where Woods and Rocks had Eares To rapture, till the savage clamor dround Both Harp and Voice; nor could the Muse defend Her Son. So fail not thou, who thee implores: For thou art Heav'nlie, shee an empty dreame. Say Goddess, what ensu'd when Raphael, The affable Arch-angel, had forewarn'd Adam by dire example to beware Apostasie, by what befell in Heaven To those Apostates, least the like befall Charg'd not to touch the interdicted Tree, If they transgress, and slight that sole command, So easily obeyd amid the choice Of all tasts else to please thir appetite, Though wandring. He with his consorted Eve The storie heard attentive, and was fill'd With admiration, and deep Muse to heare Of things so high and strange, things to thir thought So unimaginable as hate in Heav'n, And Warr so neer the Peace of God in bliss With such confusion: but the evil soon Driv'n back redounded as a flood on those From whom it sprung, impossible to mix With Blessedness. Whence Adam soon repeal'd The doubts that in his heart arose: and now Led on, yet sinless, with desire to know What neerer might concern him, how this World Of Heav'n and Earth conspicuous first began, When, and whereof created, for what cause, What within Eden or without was done Before his memorie, as one whose drouth Yet scarce allay'd still eyes the current streame, Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites, Proceeded thus to ask his Heav'nly Guest. Great things, and full of wonder in our eares, Farr differing from this World, thou hast reveal'd Divine Interpreter, by favour sent Down from the Empyrean to forewarne Us timely of what might else have bin our loss, Unknown, which human knowledg could not reach: For which to the infinitly Good we owe Immortal thanks, and his admonishment Receave with solemne purpose to observe Immutably his sovran will, the end Of what we are. But since thou hast voutsaf't Gently for our instruction to impart Things above Earthly thought, which yet concernd Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemd, Deign to descend now lower, and relate What may no less perhaps availe us known, How first began this Heav'n which we behold Distant so high, with moving Fires adornd Innumerable, and this which yeelds or fills All space, the ambient Aire wide interfus'd Imbracing round this florid Earth, what cause Mov'd the Creator in his holy Rest Through all Eternitie so late to build In Chaos, and the work begun, how soon Absolv'd, if unforbid thou maist unfould What wee, not to explore the secrets aske Of his Eternal Empire, but the more To magnifie his works, the more we know. And the great Light of Day yet wants to run Much of his Race though steep, suspens in Heav'n Held by thy voice, thy potent voice he heares, And longer will delay to heare thee tell His Generation, and the rising Birth Of Nature from the unapparent Deep: Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring Silence, and Sleep listning to thee will watch, Or we can bid his absence, till thy Song End, and dismiss thee ere the Morning shine. Thus Adam his illustrous Guest besought: And thus the Godlike Angel answerd milde. This also thy request with caution askt Obtaine: though to recount Almightie works What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice, Or heart of man suffice to comprehend? Yet what thou canst attain, which best may serve To glorifie the Maker, and inferr Thee also happier, shall not be withheld Thy hearing, such Commission from above I have receav'd, to answer thy desire Of knowledge within bounds; beyond abstain To ask, nor let thine own inventions hope Things not reveal'd, which th' invisible King, Onely Omniscient, hath supprest in Night, To none communicable in Earth or Heaven: Anough is left besides to search and know. But Knowledge is as food, and needs no less Her Temperance over Appetite, to know In measure what the mind may well contain, Oppresses else with Surfet, and soon turns Know then, that after Lucifer from Heav'n So call him, brighter once amidst the Host Of Angels, then that Starr the Starrs among Fell with his flaming Legions through the Deep Into his place, and the great Son returnd Victorious with his Saints, th' Omnipotent Eternal Father from his Throne beheld Thir multitude, and to his Son thus spake. At least our envious Foe hath fail'd, who thought All like himself rebellious, by whose aid This inaccessible high strength, the seat Of Deitie supream, us dispossest, He trusted to have seis'd, and into fraud Drew many, whom thir place knows here no more; Yet farr the greater part have kept, I see, Thir station, Heav'n yet populous retaines Number sufficient to possess her Realmes Though wide, and this high Temple to frequent With Ministeries due and solemn Rites: But least his heart exalt him in the harme Already done, to have dispeopl'd Heav'n, My damage fondly deem'd, I can repaire That detriment, if such it be to lose Self-lost, and in a moment will create Of men innumerable, there to dwell, Not here, till by degrees of merit rais'd They open to themselves at length the way Up hither, under long obedience tri'd, And Earth be chang'd to Heavn, & Heav'n to Earth, One Kingdom, Joy and Union without end. Mean while inhabit laxe, ye Powers of Heav'n, And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee This I perform, speak thou, and be it don: My overshadowing Spirit and might with thee I send along, ride forth, and bid the Deep Within appointed bounds be Heav'n and Earth, Boundless the Deep, because I am who fill Infinitude, nor vacuous the space. Though I uncircumscrib'd my self retire, And put not forth my goodness, which is free To act or not, Necessitie and Chance Approach not mee, and what I will is Fate. So spake th' Almightie, and to what he spake His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave effect. Immediate are the Acts of God, more swift Then time or motion, but to human ears Cannot without process of speech be told, So told as earthly notion can receave. Great triumph and rejoycing was in Heav'n When such was heard declar'd the Almightie's will; Glorie they sung to the most High, good will To future men, and in thir dwellings peace: Glorie to him whose just avenging ire Had driven out th' ungodly from his sight And th' habitations of the just; to him Glorie and praise, whose wisdom had ordain'd Good out of evil to create, in stead Of Spirits maligne a better Race to bring Into thir vacant room, and thence diffuse His good to Worlds and Ages infinite. So sang the Hierarchies: Mean while the Son On his great Expedition now appeer'd, Girt with Omnipotence, with Radiance crown'd Immense, and all his Father in him shon. About his Chariot numberless were pour'd And Vertues, winged Spirits, and Chariots wing'd, From the Armoury of God, where stand of old Myriads between two brazen Mountains lodg'd Against a solemn day, harnest at hand, Celestial Equipage; and now came forth Spontaneous, for within them Spirit livd, Attendant on thir Lord: Heav'n op'nd wide Her ever during Gates, Harmonious sound On golden Hinges moving, to let forth The King of Glorie in his powerful Word And Spirit coming to create new Worlds. On heav'nly ground they stood, and from the shore They view'd the vast immeasurable Abyss Outrageous as a Sea, dark, wasteful, wilde, Up from the bottom turn'd by furious windes And surging waves, as Mountains to assault Heav'ns highth, and with the Center mix the Pole. Silence, ye troubl'd waves, and thou Deep, peace, Said then th' Omnific Word, your discord end: Nor staid, but on the Wings of Cherubim Uplifted, in Paternal Glorie rode Farr into Chaos, and the World unborn; For Chaos heard his voice: him all his Traine Follow'd in bright procession to behold Creation, and the wonders of his might. Then staid the fervid Wheeles, and in his hand He took the golden Compasses, prepar'd In Gods Eternal store, to circumscribe This Universe, and all created things: One foot he center'd, and the other turn'd Round through the vast profunditie obscure, And said, thus farr extend, thus farr thy bounds, This be thy just Circumference, O World. Thus God the Heav'n created, thus the Earth, Matter unform'd and void: Darkness profound Cover'd th' Abyss: but on the watrie calme His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspred, And vital vertue infus'd, and vital warmth Throughout the fluid Mass, but downward purg'd The black tartareous cold infernal dregs Adverse to life: then founded, then conglob'd Like things to like, the rest to several place Disparted, and between spun out the Air, And Earth self-ballanc't on her Center hung. Let ther be Light, said God, and forthwith Light Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure Sprung from the Deep, and from her Native East To journie through the airie gloom began, Sphear'd in a radiant Cloud, for yet the Sun Was not; shee in a cloudie Tabernacle Sojourn'd the while. God saw the Light was good; And light from darkness by the Hemisphere He nam'd. Thus was the first Day Eev'n and Morn: Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung By the Celestial Quires, when Orient Light Exhaling first from Darkness they beheld; Birth-day of Heav'n and Earth; with joy and shout The hollow Universal Orb they fill'd, And touch't thir Golden Harps, & hymning prais'd God and his works, Creatour him they sung, Both when first Eevning was, and when first Morn. Again, God said, let ther be Firmament Amid the Waters, and let it divide The Waters from the Waters: and God made The Firmament, expanse of liquid, pure, Transparent, Elemental Air, diffus'd In circuit to the uttermost convex Of this great Round: partition firm and sure, The Waters underneath from those above Built on circumfluous Waters calme, in wide Crystallin Ocean, and the loud misrule Of Chaos farr remov'd, least fierce extreames Contiguous might distemper the whole frame: And Heav'n he nam'd the Firmament: So Eev'n And Morning Chorus sung the second Day. The Earth was form'd, but in the Womb as yet Of Waters, Embryon immature involv'd, Appeer'd not: over all the face of Earth Main Ocean flow'd, not idle, but with warme Prolific humour soft'ning all her Globe, Fermented the great Mother to conceave, Satiate with genial moisture, when God said Be gather'd now ye Waters under Heav'n Into one place, and let dry Land appeer. Immediately the Mountains huge appeer Emergent, and thir broad bare backs upheave Into the Clouds, thir tops ascend the Skie: So high as heav'd the tumid Hills, so low Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep, Capacious bed of Waters: thither they Hasted with glad precipitance, uprowld As drops on dust conglobing from the drie; Part rise in crystal Wall, or ridge direct, For haste; such flight the great command impress'd On the swift flouds: as Armies at the call Of Trumpet for of Armies thou hast heard Troop to thir Standard, so the watrie throng, Wave rowling after Wave, where way they found, If steep, with torrent rapture, if through Plaine, Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them Rock or Hill, But they, or under ground, or circuit wide With Serpent errour wandring, found thir way, And on the washie Oose deep Channels wore; Easie, e're God had bid the ground be drie, All but within those banks, where Rivers now Stream, and perpetual draw thir humid traine. The dry Land, Earth, and the great receptacle Of congregated Waters he call'd Seas: And saw that it was good, and said, Let th' Earth Put forth the verdant Grass, Herb yeilding Seed, And Fruit Tree yeilding Fruit after her kind; Whose Seed is in her self upon the Earth. He scarce had said, when the bare Earth, till then Desert and bare, unsightly, unadorn'd, Brought forth the tender Grass, whose verdure clad Her Universal Face with pleasant green, Then Herbs of every leaf, that sudden flour'd Op'ning thir various colours, and made gay Her bosom smelling sweet: and these scarce blown, Forth flourish't thick the clustring Vine, forth crept The smelling Gourd, up stood the cornie Reed Embattell'd in her field: add the humble Shrub, And Bush with frizl'd hair implicit: last Rose as in Dance the stately Trees, and spred Thir branches hung with copious Fruit; or gemm'd Thir Blossoms: with high Woods the Hills were crownd, With tufts the vallies & each fountain side, With borders long the Rivers. That Earth now Seemd like to Heav'n, a seat where Gods might dwell, Or wander with delight, and love to haunt Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rain'd Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground None was, but from the Earth a dewie Mist Went up and waterd all the ground, and each Plant of the field, which e're it was in the Earth God made, and every Herb, before it grew On the green stemm; God saw that it was good: So Eev'n and Morn recorded the Third Day. Again th' Almightie spake: Let there be Lights High in th' expanse of Heaven to divide The Day from Night; and let them be for Signes, For Seasons, and for Dayes, and circling Years, And let them be for Lights as I ordaine Thir Office in the Firmament of Heav'n To give Light on the Earth; and it was so. And God made two great Lights, great for thir use To Man, the greater to have rule by Day, The less by Night alterne: and made the Starrs, And set them in the Firmament of Heav'n To illuminate the Earth, and rule the Day In thir vicissitude, and rule the Night, And Light from Darkness to divide. God saw, Surveying his great Work, that it was good: For of Celestial Bodies first the Sun A mightie Spheare he fram'd, unlightsom first, Though of Ethereal Mould: then form'd the Moon Globose, and everie magnitude of Starrs, And sowd with Starrs the Heav'n thick as a field: Of Light by farr the greater part he took, Transplanted from her cloudie Shrine, and plac'd In the Suns Orb, made porous to receive And drink the liquid Light, firm to retaine Her gather'd beams, great Palace now of Light. Hither as to thir Fountain other Starrs Repairing, in thir gold'n Urns draw Light, And hence the Morning Planet guilds his horns; By tincture or reflection they augment Thir small peculiar, though from human sight So farr remote, with diminution seen. First in his East the glorious Lamp was seen, Regent of Day, and all th' Horizon round Invested with bright Rayes, jocond to run His Longitude through Heav'ns high rode: the gray Dawn, and the Pleiades before him danc'd Shedding sweet influence: less bright the Moon, But opposite in leveld West was set His mirror, with full face borrowing her Light From him, for other light she needed none In that aspect, and still that distance keepes Till night, then in the East her turn she shines, Revolvd on Heav'ns great Axle, and her Reign With thousand lesser Lights dividual holds, With thousand thousand Starres, that then appeer'd Spangling the Hemisphere: then first adornd With thir bright Luminaries that Set and Rose, Glad Eevning & glad Morn crownd the fourth day. And God said, let the Waters generate Reptil with Spawn abundant, living Soule: And let Fowle flie above the Earth, with wings Displayd on the op'n Firmament of Heav'n. And God created the great Whales, and each Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously The waters generated by thir kindes, And every Bird of wing after his kinde; And saw that it was good, and bless'd them, saying, Be fruitful, multiply, and in the Seas And Lakes and running Streams the waters fill; And let the Fowle be multiply'd on the Earth. Forthwith the Sounds and Seas, each Creek & Bay With Frie innumerable swarme, and Shoales Of Fish that with thir Finns & shining Scales Glide under the green Wave, in Sculles that oft Bank the mid Sea: part single or with mate Graze the Sea weed thir pasture, & through Groves Of Coral stray, or sporting with quick glance Show to the Sun thir wav'd coats dropt with Gold, Or in thir Pearlie shells at ease, attend Moist nutriment, or under Rocks thir food In jointed Armour watch: on smooth the Seale, And bended Dolphins play: part huge of bulk Wallowing unweildie, enormous in thir Gate Tempest the Ocean: there Leviathan Hugest of living Creatures, on the Deep Stretcht like a Promontorie sleeps or swimmes, And seems a moving Land, and at his Gilles Draws in, and at his Trunck spouts out a Sea. Mean while the tepid Caves, and Fens and shoares Thir Brood as numerous hatch, from the Egg that soon Bursting with kindly rupture forth disclos'd Thir callow young, but featherd soon and fledge They summ'd thir Penns, and soaring th' air sublime With clang despis'd the ground, under a cloud In prospect; there the Eagle and the Stork On Cliffs and Cedar tops thir Eyries build: Part loosly wing the Region, part more wise In common, rang'd in figure wedge thir way, Intelligent of seasons, and set forth Thir Aierie Caravan high over Sea's Flying, and over Lands with mutual wing Easing thir flight; so stears the prudent Crane Her annual Voiage, born on Windes; the Aire Floats, as they pass, fann'd with unnumber'd plumes: From Branch to Branch the smaller Birds with song Solac'd the Woods, and spred thir painted wings Till Ev'n, nor then the solemn Nightingal Ceas'd warbling, but all night tun'd her soft layes: Others on Silver Lakes and Rivers Bath'd Thir downie Brest; the Swan with Arched neck Between her white wings mantling proudly, Rowes Her state with Oarie feet: yet oft they quit The Dank, and rising on stiff Pennons, towre The mid Aereal Skie: Others on ground Walk'd firm; the crested Cock whose clarion sounds The silent hours, and th' other whose gay Traine Adorns him, colour'd with the Florid hue Of Rainbows and Starrie Eyes. The Waters thus With Fish replenisht, and the Aire with Fowle, Ev'ning and Morn solemniz'd the Fift day. The Sixt, and of Creation last arose With Eevning Harps and Mattin, when God said, Let th' Earth bring forth Fowle living in her kinde, Cattel and Creeping things, and Beast of the Earth, Each in their kinde. The Earth obey'd, and strait Op'ning her fertil Woomb teem'd at a Birth Innumerous living Creatures, perfet formes, Limb'd and full grown: out of the ground up-rose As from his Laire the wilde Beast where he wonns In Forrest wilde, in Thicket, Brake, or Den; Among the Trees in Pairs they rose, they walk'd: The Cattel in the Fields and Meddowes green: Those rare and solitarie, these in flocks Pasturing at once, and in broad Herds upsprung: The grassie Clods now Calv'd, now half appeer'd The Tawnie Lion, pawing to get free His hinder parts, then springs as broke from Bonds, And Rampant shakes his Brinded main; the Ounce, Rising, the crumbl'd Earth above them threw In Hillocks; the swift Stag from under ground Bore up his branching head: scarse from his mould Behemoth biggest born of Earth upheav'd His vastness: Fleec't the Flocks and bleating rose, As Plants: ambiguous between Sea and Land The River Horse and scalie Crocodile. At once came forth whatever creeps the ground, Insect or Worme; those wav'd thir limber fans For wings, and smallest Lineaments exact In all the Liveries dect of Summers pride With spots of Gold and Purple, azure and green: These as a line thir long dimension drew, Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not all Minims of Nature; some of Serpent kinde Wondrous in length and corpulence involv'd Thir Snakie foulds, and added wings. First crept The Parsimonious Emmet, provident Of future, in small room large heart enclos'd, Pattern of just equalitie perhaps Hereafter, join'd in her popular Tribes Of Commonaltie: swarming next appeer'd The Femal Bee that feeds her Husband Drone Deliciously, and builds her waxen Cells With Honey stor'd: the rest are numberless, And thou thir Natures know'st, and gav'st them Names, Needlest to thee repeated; nor unknown The Serpent suttl'st Beast of all the field, Of huge extent somtimes, with brazen Eyes And hairie Main terrific, though to thee Not noxious, but obedient at thy call. Now Heav'n in all her Glorie shon, and rowld Her motions, as the great first-Movers hand First wheeld thir course; Earth in her rich attire Consummate lovly smil'd; Aire, Water, Earth, By Fowl, Fish, Beast, was flown, was swum, was walkt Frequent; and of the Sixt day yet remain'd; There wanted yet the Master work, the end Of all yet don; a Creature who not prone And Brute as other Creatures, but endu'd With Sanctitie of Reason, might erect His Stature, and upright with Front serene Govern the rest, self-knowing, and from thence Magnanimous to correspond with Heav'n, But grateful to acknowledge whence his good Descends, thither with heart and voice and eyes Directed in Devotion, to adore And worship God Supream, who made him chief Of all his works: therefore the Omnipotent Eternal Father For where is not hee Present thus to his Son audibly spake. Let us make now Man in our image, Man In our similitude, and let them rule Beast of the Field, and over all the Earth, And every creeping thing that creeps the ground. This said, he formd thee, Adam, thee O Man Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breath'd The breath of Life; in his own Image hee Created thee, in the Image of God Express, and thou becam'st a living Soul. Male he created thee, but thy consort Femal for Race; then bless'd Mankinde, and said, Be fruitful, multiplie, and fill the Earth, Subdue it, and throughout Dominion hold And every living thing that moves on the Earth. Wherever thus created, for no place Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou know'st He brought thee into this delicious Grove, This Garden, planted with the Trees of God, Delectable both to behold and taste; And freely all thir pleasant fruit for food Gave thee, all sorts are here that all th' Earth yeelds, Varietie without end; but of the Tree Which tasted works knowledge of Good and Evil, Thou mai'st not; in the day thou eat'st, thou di'st; Death is the penaltie impos'd, beware, And govern well thy appetite, least sin Surprise thee, and her black attendant Death. Here finish'd hee, and all that he had made View'd, and behold all was entirely good; So Ev'n and Morn accomplish'd the Sixt day: Yet not till the Creator from his work Desisting, though unwearied, up returnd Up to the Heav'n of Heav'ns his high abode, Thence to behold this new created World Th' addition of his Empire, how it shew'd In prospect from his Throne, how good, how faire, Answering his great Idea. Up he rode Followd with acclamation and the sound Symphonious of ten thousand Harpes that tun'd Angelic harmonies: the Earth, the Aire Resounded, thou remember'st, for thou heardst The Heav'ns and all the Constellations rung, The Planets in thir stations list'ning stood, While the bright Pomp ascended jubilant. Open, ye everlasting Gates, they sung, Open, ye Heav'ns, your living dores; let in The great Creator from his work returnd Magnificent, his Six days work, a World; Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deigne To visit oft the dwellings of just Men Delighted, and with frequent intercourse Thither will send his winged Messengers On errands of supernal Grace. So sung The glorious Train ascending: He through Heav'n, That open'd wide her blazing Portals, led To Gods Eternal house direct the way, A broad and ample rode, whose dust is Gold And pavement Starrs, as Starrs to thee appeer, Seen in the Galaxie, that Milkie way Which nightly as a circling Zone thou seest Pouderd with Starrs. And now on Earth the Seaventh Eev'ning arose in Eden, for the Sun Was set, and twilight from the East came on, Forerunning Night; when at the holy mount Of Heav'ns high-seated top, th' Impereal Throne Of Godhead, fixt for ever firm and sure, The Filial Power arriv'd, and sate him down With his great Father for he also went Invisible, yet staid such priviledge Hath Omnipresence and the work ordain'd, Author and end of all things, and from work Now resting, bless'd and hallowd the Seav'nth day, As resting on that day from all his work, But not in silence holy kept; the Harp Had work and rested not, the solemn Pipe, And Dulcimer, all Organs of sweet stop, All sounds on Fret by String or Golden Wire Temper'd soft Tunings, intermixt with Voice Choral or Unison: of incense Clouds Fuming from Golden Censers hid the Mount. Creation and the Six dayes acts they sung, Great are thy works, Jehovah, infinite Thy power; what thought can measure thee or tongue Relate thee; greater now in thy return Then from the Giant Angels; thee that day Thy Thunders magnifi'd; but to create Is greater then created to destroy. Who can impair thee, mighty King, or bound Thy Empire? easily the proud attempt Of Spirits apostat and thir Counsels vaine Thou hast repeld, while impiously they thought Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw The number of thy worshippers. Who seekes To lessen thee, against his purpose serves To manifest the more thy might: his evil Thou usest, and from thence creat'st more good. Witness this new-made World, another Heav'n From Heaven Gate not farr, founded in view On the cleer Hyaline, the Glassie Sea; Of amplitude almost immense, with Starr's Numerous, and every Starr perhaps a World Of destind habitation; but thou know'st Thir seasons: among these the seat of men, Earth with her nether Ocean circumfus'd, Thir pleasant dwelling place. Thrice happie men, And sons of men, whom God hath thus advanc't, Created in his Image, there to dwell And worship him, and in reward to rule And multiply a Race of Worshippers Holy and just: thrice happie if they know Thir happiness, and persevere upright. So sung they, and the Empyrean rung, With Halleluiahs: Thus was Sabbath kept. And thy request think now fulfill'd, that ask'd How first this World and face of things began, And what before thy memorie was don From the beginning, that posteritie Informd by thee might know; if else thou seekst Aught, not surpassing human measure, say. See Genesis i. V. margin. So Charming left his voice, that he a while Thought him still speaking, still stood fixt to hear; Then as new wak't thus gratefully repli'd. What thanks sufficient, or what recompence Equal have I to render thee, Divine Hystorian, who thus largely hast allayd The thirst I had of knowledge, and voutsaf't This friendly condescention to relate Things else by me unsearchable, now heard With wonder, but delight, and, as is due, With glorie attributed to the high Creator; some thing yet of doubt remaines, Which onely thy solution can resolve. When I behold this goodly Frame, this World Of Heav'n and Earth consisting, and compute, Thir magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a graine, An Atom, with the Firmament compar'd And all her numberd Starrs, that seem to rowle Spaces incomprehensible for such Thir distance argues and thir swift return Diurnal meerly to officiate light Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot, One day and night; in all thir vast survey Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire, How Nature wise and frugal could commit Such disproportions, with superfluous hand So many nobler Bodies to create, Greater so manifold to this one use, For aught appeers, and on thir Orbs impose Such restless revolution day by day Repeated, while the sedentarie Earth, That better might with farr less compass move, Serv'd by more noble then her self, attaines Her end without least motion, and receaves, As Tribute such a sumless journey brought Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light; Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number failes. So spake our Sire, and by his count'nance seemd Entring on studious thoughts abstruse, which Eve Perceaving where she sat retir'd in sight, With lowliness Majestic from her seat, And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay, Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flours, To visit how they prosper'd, bud and bloom, Her Nurserie; they at her coming sprung And toucht by her fair tendance gladlier grew. Yet went she not, as not with such discourse Delighted, or not capable her eare Of what was high: such pleasure she reserv'd, Adam relating, she sole Auditress; Her Husband the Relater she preferr'd Chose rather; hee, she knew would intermix Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip Not Words alone pleas'd her. O when meet now Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honour joyn'd? With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went; Not unattended, for on her as Queen A pomp of winning Graces waited still, And from about her shot Darts of desire Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight. And Raphael now to Adam's doubt propos'd Benevolent and facil thus repli'd. To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heav'n Is as the Book of God before thee set, Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learne This to attain, whether Heav'n move or Earth, Imports not, if thou reck'n right, the rest From Man or Angel the great Architect Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge His secrets to be scann'd by them who ought Rather admire; or if they list to try Conjecture, he his Fabric of the Heav'ns Hath left to thir disputes, perhaps to move His laughter at thir quaint Opinions wide Hereafter, when they come to model Heav'n And calculate the Starrs, how they will weild The mightie frame, how build, unbuild, contrive To save appeerances, how gird the Sphear With Centric and Eccentric scribl'd o're, Alreadie by thy reasoning this I guess, Who art to lead thy ofspring, and supposest That Bodies bright and greater should not serve The less not bright, nor Heav'n such journies run, Earth sitting still, when she alone receaves The benefit: consider first, that Great Or Bright inferrs not Excellence: the Earth Though, in comparison of Heav'n, so small, Nor glistering, may of solid good containe More plenty then the Sun that barren shines, Whose vertue on it self workes no effect, But in the fruitful Earth; there first receavd His beams, unactive else, thir vigor find. Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries Officious, but to thee Earths habitant. And for the Heav'ns wide Circuit, let it speak The Makers high magnificence, who built So spacious, and his Line stretcht out so farr; That Man may know he dwells not in his own; An Edifice too large for him to fill, Lodg'd in a small partition, and the rest Ordain'd for uses to his Lord best known. The swiftness of those Circles attribute, Though numberless, to his Omnipotence, That to corporeal substances could adde Speed almost Spiritual; mee thou thinkst not slow, Who since the Morning hour set out from Heav'n Where God resides, and ere mid-day arriv'd In Eden, distance inexpressible By Numbers that have name. But this I urge, Admitting Motion in the Heav'ns, to shew Invalid that which thee to doubt it mov'd; Not that I so affirm, though so it seem To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth. God to remove his wayes from human sense, Plac'd Heav'n from Earth so farr, that earthly sight, If it presume, might erre in things too high, And no advantage gaine. What if the Sun Be Center to the World, and other Starrs By his attractive vertue and thir own Incited, dance about him various rounds? Thir wandring course now high, now low, then hid, Progressive, retrograde, or standing still, In six thou seest, and what if sev'nth to these The Planet Earth, so stedfast though she seem, Insensibly three different Motions move? Which else to several Sphears thou must ascribe, Mov'd contrarie with thwart obliquities, Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb suppos'd, Invisible else above all Starrs, the Wheele Of Day and Night; which needs not thy beleefe, If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day Travelling East, and with her part averse From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part Still luminous by his ray. What if that light Sent from her through the wide transpicuous aire, To the terrestrial Moon be as a Starr This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there, Feilds and Inhabitants: Her spots thou seest As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce Fruits in her soft'nd Soile, for some to eate Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps With thir attendant Moons thou wilt descrie Which two great Sexes animate the World, Stor'd in each Orb perhaps with some that live. For such vast room in Nature unpossest By living Soule, desert and desolate, Onely to shine, yet scarce to contribute Each Orb a glimps of Light, conveyd so farr Down to this habitable, which returnes Light back to them, is obvious to dispute. But whether thus these things, or whether not, Whether the Sun predominant in Heav'n Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun, Hee from the East his flaming rode begin, Or Shee from West her silent course advance With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps On her soft Axle, while she paces Eev'n, And bears thee soft with the smooth Air along, Sollicit not thy thoughts with matters hid, Leave them to God above, him serve and feare; Of other Creatures, as him pleases best, Wherever plac't, let him dispose: joy thou In what he gives to thee, this Paradise And thy faire Eve; Heav'n is for thee too high To know what passes there; be lowlie wise: Think onely what concernes thee and thy being; Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there Live, in what state, condition or degree, Contented that thus farr hath been reveal'd Not of Earth onely but of highest Heav'n. To whom thus Adam cleerd of doubt, repli'd. How fully hast thou satisfi'd mee, pure Intelligence of Heav'n, Angel serene, And freed from intricacies, taught to live, The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which God hath bid dwell farr off all anxious cares, And not molest us, unless we our selves Seek them with wandring thoughts, and notions vaine. But apt the Mind or Fancie is to roave Uncheckt, and of her roaving is no end; Till warn'd, or by experience taught, she learne, That not to know at large of things remote From use, obscure and suttle, but to know That which before us lies in daily life, Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume, Or emptiness, or fond impertinence, And renders us in things that most concerne Unpractis'd, unprepar'd, and still to seek. Therefore from this high pitch let us descend A lower flight, and speak of things at hand Useful, whence haply mention may arise Of somthing not unseasonable to ask By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deign'd. Thee I have heard relating what was don Ere my remembrance: now hear mee relate My Storie, which perhaps thou hast not heard; And Day is yet not spent; till then thou seest How suttly to detaine thee I devise, Inviting thee to hear while I relate, Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply: For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heav'n, And sweeter thy discourse is to my eare Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst And hunger both, from labour, at the houre Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill, Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine Imbu'd, bring to thir sweetness no satietie. To whom thus Raphael answer'd heav'nly meek. Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men, Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee Abundantly his gifts hath also pour'd, Inward and outward both, his image faire: Speaking or mute all comliness and grace Attends thee, and each word, each motion formes. Nor less think wee in Heav'n of thee on Earth Then of our fellow servant, and inquire Gladly into the wayes of God with Man: For God we see hath honour'd thee, and set On Man his equal Love: say therefore on; For I that Day was absent, as befell, Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure, Farr on excursion toward the Gates of Hell; Squar'd in full Legion such command we had To see that none thence issu'd forth a spie, Or enemie, while God was in his work, Least hee incenst at such eruption bold, Destruction with Creation might have mixt. Not that they durst without his leave attempt, But us he sends upon his high behests For state, as Sovran King, and to enure Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut The dismal Gates, and barricado'd strong; But long ere our approaching heard within Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song, Torment, and lowd lament, and furious rage. Glad we return'd up to the coasts of Light Ere Sabbath Eev'ning: so we had in charge. But thy relation now; for I attend, Pleas'd with thy words no less then thou with mine. So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire. For Man to tell how human Life began Is hard; for who himself beginning knew? Desire with thee still longer to converse Induc'd me. As new wak't from soundest sleep Soft on the flourie herb I found me laid In Balmie Sweat, which with his Beames the Sun Soon dri'd, and on the reaking moisture fed. Strait toward Heav'n my wondring Eyes I turnd, And gaz'd a while the ample Skie, till rais'd By quick instinctive motion up I sprung, As thitherward endevoring, and upright Stood on my feet; about me round I saw Hill, Dale, and shadie Woods, and sunnie Plaines, And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these, Creatures that livd, and movd, and walk'd, or flew, Birds on the branches warbling; all things smil'd, With fragrance and with joy my heart oreflow'd. My self I then perus'd, and Limb by Limb Survey'd, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran With supple joints, as lively vigour led: But who I was, or where, or from what cause, Knew not; to speak I tri'd, and forthwith spake, My Tongue obey'd and readily could name What e're I saw. Thou Sun, said I, faire Light, And thou enlight'nd Earth, so fresh and gay, And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell, Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here? Not of my self; by some great Maker then, In goodness and in power praeeminent; Tell me, how may I know him, how adore, From whom I have that thus I move and live, And feel that I am happier then I know. While thus I call'd, and stray'd I knew not whither, From where I first drew Aire, and first beheld This happie Light, when answer none return'd, On a green shadie Bank profuse of Flours Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep First found me, and with soft oppression seis'd My droused sense, untroubl'd, though I thought I then was passing to my former state Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve: When suddenly stood at my Head a dream, Whose inward apparition gently mov'd My Fancy to believe I yet had being, And livd: One came, methought, of shape Divine, And said, thy Mansion wants thee, Adam, rise, First Man, of Men innumerable ordain'd First Father, call'd by thee I come thy Guide To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepar'd. So saying, by the hand he took me rais'd, And over Fields and Waters, as in Aire Smooth sliding without step, last led me up A woodie Mountain; whose high top was plaine, A Circuit wide, enclos'd, with goodliest Trees Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw Of Earth before scarse pleasant seemd. Each Tree Load'n with fairest Fruit, that hung to the Eye Tempting, stirr'd in me sudden appetite To pluck and eate; whereat I wak'd, and found Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream Had lively shadowd: Here had new begun My wandring, had not hee who was my Guide Up hither, from among the Trees appeer'd, Presence Divine. Rejoycing, but with aw In adoration at his feet I fell Submiss: he rear'd me, & Whom thou soughtst I am, Said mildely, Author of all this thou seest Above, or round about thee or beneath. This Paradise I give thee, count it thine To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eate: Of every Tree that in the Garden growes Eate freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth: But of the Tree whose operation brings Knowledg of good and ill, which I have set Remember what I warne thee, shun to taste, And shun the bitter consequence: for know, The day thou eat'st thereof, my sole command Transgrest, inevitably thou shalt dye; From that day mortal, and this happie State Shalt loose, expell'd from hence into a World Of woe and sorrow. Sternly he pronounc'd The rigid interdiction, which resounds Yet dreadful in mine eare, though in my choice Not to incur; but soon his cleer aspect Return'd and gratious purpose thus renew'd. Not onely these fair bounds, but all the Earth To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords Possess it, and all things that therein live, Or live in Sea, or Aire, Beast, Fish, and Fowle. In signe whereof each Bird and Beast behold After thir kindes; I bring them to receave From thee thir Names, and pay thee fealtie With low subjection; understand the same Of Fish within thir watry residence, Not hither summond, since they cannot change Thir Element to draw the thinner Aire. As thus he spake, each Bird and Beast behold Approaching two and two, These cowring low With blandishment, each Bird stoop'd on his wing. I nam'd them, as they pass'd, and understood Thir Nature, with such knowledg God endu'd My sudden apprehension: but in these I found not what me thought I wanted still; And to the Heav'nly vision thus presum'd. O by what Name, for thou above all these, Above mankinde, or aught then mankinde higher, Surpassest farr my naming, how may I Adore thee, Author of this Universe, And all this good to man, for whose well being So amply, and with hands so liberal Thou hast provided all things: but with mee I see not who partakes. In solitude What happiness, who can enjoy alone, Or all enjoying, what contentment find? Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright, As with a smile more bright'nd, thus repli'd. What call'st thou solitude, is not the Earth With various living creatures, and the Aire Replenisht, and all these at thy command To come and play before thee, know'st thou not Thir language and thir wayes, they also know, And reason not contemptibly; with these Find pastime, and beare rule; thy Realm is large. So spake the Universal Lord, and seem'd So ordering. I with leave of speech implor'd, And humble deprecation thus repli'd. Let not my words offend thee, Heav'nly Power, My Maker, be propitious while I speak. Hast thou not made me here thy substitute, And these inferiour farr beneath me set? Among unequals what societie Can sort, what harmonie or true delight? Which must be mutual, in proportion due Giv'n and receiv'd; but in disparitie The one intense, the other still remiss Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak Such as I seek, fit to participate All rational delight, wherein the brute Cannot be human consort; they rejoyce Each with thir kinde, Lion with Lioness; So fitly them in pairs thou hast combin'd; Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Fowle So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape; Wors then can Man with Beast, and least of all. Whereto th' Almighty answer'd, not displeas'd. A nice and suttle happiness I see Thou to thy self proposest, in the choice Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitarie. What thinkst thou then of mee, and this my State, Seem I to thee sufficiently possest Of happiness, or not? who am alone From all Eternitie, for none I know Second to mee or like, equal much less. How have I then with whom to hold converse Save with the Creatures which I made, and those To me inferiour, infinite descents Beneath what other Creatures are to thee? He ceas'd, I lowly answer'd. To attaine The highth and depth of thy Eternal wayes All human thoughts come short, Supream of things; Thou in thy self art perfet, and in thee Is no deficience found; not so is Man, But in degree, the cause of his desire By conversation with his like to help, Or solace his defects. No need that thou Shouldst propagat, already infinite; And through all numbers absolute, though One; But Man by number is to manifest His single imperfection, and beget Like of his like, his Image multipli'd, In unitie defective, which requires Collateral love, and deerest amitie. Thou in thy secresie although alone, Best with thy self accompanied, seek'st not Social communication, yet so pleas'd, Canst raise thy Creature to what highth thou wilt Of Union or Communion, deifi'd; I by conversing cannot these erect From prone, nor in thir wayes complacence find. Thus I embold'nd spake, and freedom us'd Permissive, and acceptance found, which gain'd This answer from the gratious voice Divine. Thus farr to try thee, Adam, I was pleas'd, And finde thee knowing not of Beasts alone, Which thou hast rightly nam'd, but of thy self, Expressing well the spirit within thee free, My Image, not imparted to the Brute, Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike, And be so minded still; I, ere thou spak'st, Knew it not good for Man to be alone, And no such companie as then thou saw'st Intended thee, for trial onely brought, To see how thou could'st judge of fit and meet: What next I bring shall please thee, be assur'd, Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self, Thy wish, exactly to thy hearts desire. Hee ended, or I heard no more, for now My earthly by his Heav'nly overpowerd, Which it had long stood under, streind to the highth In that celestial Colloquie sublime, As with an object that excels the sense, Dazl'd and spent, sunk down, and sought repair Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, call'd By Nature as in aide, and clos'd mine eyes. Mine eyes he clos'd, but op'n left the Cell Of Fancie my internal sight, by which Abstract as in a transe methought I saw, Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape Still glorious before whom awake I stood; Who stooping op'nd my left side, and took From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warme, And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound, But suddenly with flesh fill'd up & heal'd: The Rib he formd and fashond with his hands; Under his forming hands a Creature grew, Manlike, but different sex, so lovly faire, That what seemd fair in all the World, seemd now Mean, or in her summd up, in her containd And in her looks, which from that time infus'd Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before, And into all things from her Aire inspir'd The spirit of love and amorous delight. She disappeerd, and left me dark, I wak'd To find her, or for ever to deplore Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure: When out of hope, behold her, not farr off, Such as I saw her in my dream, adornd With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow To make her amiable: On she came, Led by her Heav'nly Maker, though unseen, And guided by his voice, nor uninformd Of nuptial Sanctitie and marriage Rites: Grace was in all her steps, Heav'n in her Eye, In every gesture dignitie and love. I overjoyd could not forbear aloud. This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfill'd Thy words, Creator bounteous and benigne, Giver of all things faire, but fairest this Of all thy gifts, nor enviest. I now see Extracted; for this cause he shall forgoe Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere; And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soule. She heard me thus, and though divinely brought, Her vertue and the conscience of her worth, That would be woo'd, and not unsought be won, Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retir'd, The more desirable, or to say all, Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought, Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turn'd; I follow'd her, she what was Honour knew, And with obsequious Majestie approv'd My pleaded reason. To the Nuptial Bowre I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heav'n, And happie Constellations on that houre Shed thir selectest influence; the Earth Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill; Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires Whisper'd it to the Woods, and from thir wings Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicie Shrub, Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Eevning Starr On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp. Thus I have told thee all my State, and brought My Storie to the sum of earthly bliss Which I enjoy, and must confess to find In all things else delight indeed, but such As us'd or not, works in the mind no change, Nor vehement desire, these delicacies I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, & Flours, Walks, and the melodie of Birds; but here Farr otherwise, transported I behold, Transported touch; here passion first I felt, Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else Superiour and unmov'd, here onely weake Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance. Or Nature faild in mee, and left some part Not proof enough such Object to sustain, Or from my side subducting, took perhaps More then enough; at least on her bestow'd Too much of Ornament, in outward shew Elaborate, of inward less exact. For well I understand in the prime end Of Nature her th' inferiour, in the mind And inward Faculties, which most excell, In outward also her resembling less His Image who made both, and less expressing The character of that Dominion giv'n O're other Creatures; yet when I approach Her loveliness, so absolute she seems And in her self compleat, so well to know Her own, that what she wills to do or say, Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best; All higher knowledge in her presence falls Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her Looses discount'nanc't, and like folly shewes; Authoritie and Reason on her waite, As one intended first, not after made Occasionally; and to consummate all, Greatness of mind and nobleness thir seat Build in her loveliest, and create an awe About her, as a guard Angelic plac't. To whom the Angel with contracted brow. Accuse not Nature, she hath don her part; Do thou but thine, and be not diffident Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou Dismiss not her, when most thou needst her nigh, By attributing overmuch to things Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav'st. For what admir'st thou, what transports thee so, An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love, Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self; Then value: Oft times nothing profits more Then self-esteem, grounded on just and right Well manag'd; of that skill the more thou know'st, The more she will acknowledge thee her Head, And to realities yeild all her shows; Made so adorn for thy delight the more, So awful, that with honour thou maist love Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise. But if the sense of touch whereby mankind Is propagated seem such dear delight Beyond all other, think the same voutsaf't To Cattel and each Beast; which would not be To them made common & divulg'd, if aught Therein enjoy'd were worthy to subdue The Soule of Man, or passion in him move. What higher in her societie thou findst Attractive, human, rational, love still; In loving thou dost well, in passion not, Wherein true Love consists not; love refines The thoughts, and heart enlarges, hath his seat In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale By which to heav'nly Love thou maist ascend, Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found. To whom thus half abash't Adam repli'd. Neither her out-side formd so fair, nor aught In procreation common to all kindes Though higher of the genial Bed by far, And with mysterious reverence I deem So much delights me, as those graceful acts, Those thousand decencies that daily flow From all her words and actions, mixt with Love And sweet compliance, which declare unfeign'd Union of Mind, or in us both one Soule; Harmonie to behold in wedded pair More grateful then harmonious sound to the eare. Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose What inward thence I feel, not therefore foild, Who meet with various objects, from the sense Variously representing; yet still free Approve the best, and follow what I approve. To love thou blam'st me not, for love thou saist Leads up to Heav'n, is both the way and guide; Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask; Love not the heav'nly Spirits, and how thir Love Express they, by looks onely, or do they mix Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? To whom the Angel with a smile that glow'd Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue, Answer'd. Let it suffice thee that thou know'st Us happie, and without Love no happiness. Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy'st And pure thou wert created we enjoy In eminence, and obstacle find none Of membrane, joynt, or limb, exclusive barrs: Easier then Air with Air, if Spirits embrace, Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure Desiring; nor restrain'd conveyance need As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul. But I can now no more; the parting Sun Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles Hesperean sets, my Signal to depart. Be strong, live happie, and love, but first of all Him whom to love is to obey, and keep His great command; take heed least Passion sway Thy Judgement to do aught, which else free Will Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons The weal or woe in thee is plac't; beware. I in thy persevering shall rejoyce, And all the Blest: stand fast; to stand or fall Free in thine own Arbitrement it lies. Perfet within, no outward aid require; And all temptation to transgress repel. So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus Follow'd with benediction. Since to part, Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger, Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore. Gentle to me and affable hath been Thy condescension, and shall be honour'd ever With grateful Memorie: thou to mankind Be good and friendly still, and oft return. So parted they, the Angel up to Heav'n From the thick shade, and Adam to his Bowre. Book VII was divided into two at line . Line had read 'To whom thus Adam gratefully repli'd'. No more of talk where God or Angel Guest With Man, as with his Friend, familiar us'd To sit indulgent, and with him partake Rural repast, permitting him the while Venial discourse unblam'd: I now must change Those Notes to Tragic; foul distrust, and breach Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt And disobedience: On the part of Heav'n Now alienated, distance and distaste, Anger and just rebuke, and judgement giv'n, That brought into this World a world of woe, Sinne and her shadow Death, and Miserie Deaths Harbinger: Sad task, yet argument Not less but more Heroic then the wrauth Of stern Achilles on his Foe pursu'd Thrice Fugitive about Troy Wall; or rage Of Turnus for Lavinia disespous'd, Or Neptun's ire or Juno's, that so long Perplex'd the Greek and Cytherea's Son; If answerable style I can obtaine Of my Celestial Patroness, who deignes Her nightly visitation unimplor'd, And dictates to me slumbring, or inspires Easie my unpremeditated Verse: Since first this subject for Heroic Song Pleas'd me long choosing, and beginning late; Not sedulous by Nature to indite Warrs, hitherto the onely Argument Heroic deem'd, chief maistrie to dissect With long and tedious havoc fabl'd Knights In Battels feign'd; the better fortitude Unsung; or to describe Races and Games, Or tilting Furniture, emblazon'd Shields, Impreses quaint, Caparisons and Steeds; Bases and tinsel Trappings, gorgious Knights At Joust and Torneament; then marshal'd Feast Serv'd up in Hall with Sewers, and Seneshals; The skill of Artifice or Office mean, Not that which justly gives Heroic name To Person or to Poem. Mee of these Nor skilld nor studious, higher Argument Remaines, sufficient of it self to raise That name, unless an age too late, or cold Climat, or Years damp my intended wing Deprest, and much they may, if all be mine, Not Hers who brings it nightly to my Ear. The Sun was sunk, and after him the Starr Of Hesperus, whose Office is to bring Twilight upon the Earth, short Arbiter Twixt Day and Night, and now from end to end Nights Hemisphere had veild the Horizon round: When Satan who late fled before the threats Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improv'd In meditated fraud and malice, bent On mans destruction, maugre what might hap Of heavier on himself, fearless return'd. By Night he fled, and at Midnight return'd From compassing the Earth, cautious of day, Since Uriel Regent of the Sun descri'd His entrance, and forewarnd the Cherubim That kept thir watch; thence full of anguish driv'n, The space of seven continu'd Nights he rode With darkness, thrice the Equinoctial Line He circl'd, four times cross'd the Carr of Night From Pole to Pole, traversing each Colure; On the eighth return'd, and on the Coast averse From entrance or Cherubic Watch, by stealth Found unsuspected way. There was a place, Now not, though Sin, not Time, first wraught the change, Where Tigris at the foot of Paradise Into a Gulf shot under ground, till part In with the River sunk, and with it rose Satan involv'd in rising Mist, then sought Where to lie hid; Sea he had searcht and Land From Eden over Pontus, and the Poole Maeotis, up beyond the River Ob; Downward as farr Antartic; and in length West from Orantes to the Ocean barr'd At Darien, thence to the Land where flowes Ganges and Indus: thus the Orb he roam'd With narrow search; and with inspection deep Consider'd every Creature, which of all Most opportune might serve his Wiles, and found The Serpent suttlest Beast of all the Field. Him after long debate, irresolute Of thoughts revolv'd, his final sentence chose Fit Vessel, fittest Imp of fraud, in whom To enter, and his dark suggestions hide From sharpest sight: for in the wilie Snake, Whatever sleights none would suspicious mark, As from his wit and native suttletie Proceeding, which in other Beasts observ'd Doubt might beget of Diabolic pow'r Active within beyond the sense of brute. Thus he resolv'd, but first from inward griefe His bursting passion into plaints thus pour'd: O Earth, how like to Heav'n, if not preferrd More justly, Seat worthier of Gods, as built With second thoughts, reforming what was old! For what God after better worse would build? Terrestrial Heav'n, danc't round by other Heav'ns That shine, yet bear thir bright officious Lamps, Light above Light, for thee alone, as seems, In thee concentring all thir precious beams Of sacred influence: As God in Heav'n Is Center, yet extends to all, so thou Centring receav'st from all those Orbs; in thee, Not in themselves, all thir known vertue appeers Productive in Herb, Plant, and nobler birth Of Creatures animate with gradual life Of Growth, Sense, Reason, all summ'd up in Man. With what delight could I have walkt thee round If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange Now Land, now Sea, & Shores with Forrest crownd, Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these Find place or refuge; and the more I see Pleasures about me, so much more I feel Torment within me, as from the hateful siege Of contraries; all good to me becomes Bane, and in Heav'n much worse would be my state. But neither here seek I, no nor in Heav'n To dwell, unless by maistring Heav'ns Supreame; Nor hope to be my self less miserable By what I seek, but others to make such As I though thereby worse to me redound: For onely in destroying I finde ease To my relentless thoughts; and him destroyd, Or won to what may work his utter loss, For whom all this was made, all this will soon Follow, as to him linkt in weal or woe, In wo then; that destruction wide may range: To mee shall be the glorie sole among The infernal Powers, in one day to have marr'd What he Almightie styl'd, six Nights and Days Continu'd making, and who knows how long Before had bin contriving, though perhaps Not longer then since I in one Night freed From servitude inglorious welnigh half Th' Angelic Name, and thinner left the throng Of his adorers: hee to be aveng'd, And to repaire his numbers thus impair'd, Whether such vertue spent of old now faild More Angels to Create, if they at least Are his Created or to spite us more, Determin'd to advance into our room A Creature form'd of Earth, and him endow, Exalted from so base original, With Heav'nly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed He effected; Man he made, and for him built Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat, Him Lord pronounc'd, and, O indignitie! Subjected to his service Angel wings, And flaming Ministers to watch and tend Thir earthlie Charge: Of these the vigilance I dread, and to elude, thus wrapt in mist Of midnight vapor glide obscure, and prie In every Bush and Brake, where hap may finde The Serpent sleeping, in whose mazie foulds To hide me, and the dark intent I bring. O foul descent! that I who erst contended With Gods to sit the highest, am now constraind Into a Beast, and mixt with bestial slime, This essence to incarnate and imbrute, That to the hight of Deitie aspir'd; But what will not Ambition and Revenge Descend to? who aspires must down as low As high he soard, obnoxious first or last To basest things. Revenge, at first though sweet, Bitter ere long back on it self recoiles; Let it; I reck not, so it light well aim'd, Since higher I fall short, on him who next Provokes my envie, this new Favorite Of Heav'n, this Man of Clay, Son of despite, Whom us the more to spite his Maker rais'd From dust: spite then with spite is best repaid. So saying, through each Thicket Danck or Drie, Like a black mist low creeping, he held on His midnight search, where soonest he might finde The Serpent: him fast sleeping soon he found In Labyrinth of many a round self-rowl'd, His head the midst, well stor'd with suttle wiles: Not yet in horrid Shade or dismal Den, Not nocent yet, but on the grassie Herbe Fearless unfeard he slept: in at his Mouth The Devil enterd, and his brutal sense, In heart or head, possessing soon inspir'd With act intelligential; but his sleep Disturbd not, waiting close th' approach of Morn. Now whenas sacred Light began to dawne In Eden on the humid Flours, that breathd Thir morning Incense, when all things that breath, From th' Earths great Altar send up silent praise To the Creator, and his Nostrils fill With gratefull Smell, forth came the human pair And joynd thir vocal Worship to the Quire Of Creatures wanting voice, that done, partake The season, prime for sweetest Sents and Aires: Then commune how that day they best may ply Thir growing work: for much thir work outgrew The hands dispatch of two Gardning so wide. And Eve first to her Husband thus began. Adam, well may we labour still to dress This Garden, still to tend Plant, Herb and Flour. Our pleasant task enjoyn'd, but till more hands Aid us, the work under our labour grows, Luxurious by restraint; what we by day Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind, One night or two with wanton growth derides Tending to wilde. Thou therefore now advise Or hear what to my mind first thoughts present, Let us divide our labours, thou where choice Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind The Woodbine round this Arbour, or direct The clasping Ivie where to climb, while I In yonder Spring of Roses intermixt With Myrtle, find what to redress till Noon: For while so near each other thus all day Our task we choose, what wonder if no near Looks intervene and smiles, or object new Casual discourse draw on, which intermits Our dayes work brought to little, though begun Early, and th' hour of Supper comes unearn'd. To whom mild answer Adam thus return'd. Sole Eve, Associate sole, to me beyond Compare above all living Creatures deare, Well hast thou motion'd, wel thy thoughts imployd How we might best fulfill the work which here God hath assign'd us, nor of me shalt pass Unprais'd: for nothing lovelier can be found In woman, then to studie houshold good, And good workes in her Husband to promote. Yet not so strictly hath our Lord impos'd Labour, as to debarr us when we need Refreshment, whether food, or talk between, Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse Of looks and smiles, for smiles from Reason flow, To brute deni'd, and are of Love the food, Love not the lowest end of human life. For not to irksom toile, but to delight He made us, and delight to Reason joyn'd. These paths and Bowers doubt not but our joynt Will keep from Wilderness with ease, as wide As we need walk, till younger hands ere long Assist us: But if much converse perhaps Thee satiate, to short absence I could yeild. For solitude somtimes is best societie, And short retirement urges sweet returne. But other doubt possesses me, least harm Befall thee sever'd from me; for thou knowst What hath bin warn'd us, what malicious Foe Envying our happiness, and of his own Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame By sly assault; and somwhere nigh at hand Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find His wish and best advantage, us asunder, Hopeless to circumvent us joynd, where each To other speedie aide might lend at need; Whether his first design be to withdraw Our fealtie from God, or to disturb Conjugal Love, then which perhaps no bliss Enjoy'd by us excites his envie more; Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side That gave thee being, stil shades thee and protects. The Wife, where danger or dishonour lurks, Safest and seemliest by her Husband staies, Who guards her, or with her the worst endures. To whom the Virgin Majestie of Eve, As one who loves, and some unkindness meets, With sweet austeer composure thus reply'd. Ofspring of Heav'n and Earth, and all Earths Lord, That such an enemie we have, who seeks Our ruin, both by thee informd I learne, And from the parting Angel over-heard As in a shadie nook I stood behind, Just then returnd at shut of Evening Flours. But that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt To God or thee, because we have a foe May tempt it, I expected not to hear. His violence thou fearst not, being such, As wee, not capable of death or paine, Can either not receave, or can repell. His fraud is then thy fear, which plain inferrs Thy equal fear that my firm Faith and Love Can by his fraud be shak'n or seduc't; Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy Brest, Adam, misthought of her to thee so dear? To whom with healing words Adam reply'd. Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve, For such thou art, from sin and blame entire: Not diffident of thee do I dissuade Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid Th' attempt it self, intended by our Foe. For hee who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses The tempted with dishonour foul, suppos'd Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff Against temptation: thou thy self with scorne And anger wouldst resent the offer'd wrong, Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then, If such affront I labour to avert From thee alone, which on us both at once The Enemie, though bold, will hardly dare, Or daring, first on mee th' assault shall light. Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn; Suttle he needs must be, who could seduce Angels, nor think superfluous others aid. I from the influence of thy looks receave Access in every Vertue, in thy sight More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on, Shame to be overcome or over-reacht Would utmost vigor raise, and rais'd unite. Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel When I am present, and thy trial choose With me, best witness of thy Vertue tri'd. So spake domestick Adam in his care And Matrimonial Love, but Eve, who thought Less attributed to her Faith sincere, Thus her reply with accent sweet renewd. If this be our condition, thus to dwell In narrow circuit strait'nd by a Foe, Suttle or violent, we not endu'd Single with like defence, wherever met, How are we happie, still in fear of harm? But harm precedes not sin: onely our Foe Tempting affronts us with his foul esteem Of our integritie: his foul esteeme Sticks no dishonor on our Front, but turns Foul on himself; then wherfore shund or feard By us? who rather double honour gaine From his surmise prov'd false, finde peace within, Favour from Heav'n, our witness from th' event. And what is Faith, Love, Vertue unassaid Alone, without exterior help sustaind? Let us not then suspect our happie State Left so imperfet by the Maker wise, As not secure to single or combin'd. Fraile is our happiness, if this be so, And Eden were no Eden thus expos'd. To whom thus Adam fervently repli'd. O Woman, best are all things as the will Of God ordaind them, his creating hand Nothing imperfet or deficient left Of all that he Created, much less Man, Or ought that might his happie State secure, Secure from outward force; within himself The danger lies, yet lies within his power: Against his will he can receave no harme. But God left free the Will, for what obeyes Reason, is free, and Reason he made right, But bid her well beware, and still erect, Least by some faire appeering good surpris'd She dictate false, and missinforme the Will To do what God expresly hath forbid. Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoynes, That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me. Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve, Since Reason not impossibly may meet Some specious object by the Foe subornd, And fall into deception unaware, Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warnd. Seek not temptation then, which to avoide Were better, and most likelie if from mee Thou sever not; Trial will come unsought. Wouldst thou approve thy constancie, approve First thy obedience; th' other who can know, Not seeing thee attempted, who attest? But if thou think, trial unsought may finde Us both securer then thus warnd thou seemst, Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more; Go in thy native innocence, relie On what thou hast of vertue, summon all, For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine. So spake the Patriarch of Mankinde, but Eve Persisted, yet submiss, though last, repli'd. With thy permission then, and thus forewarnd Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words Touchd onely, that our trial, when least sought, May finde us both perhaps farr less prepar'd, The willinger I goe, nor much expect A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek; So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse. Thus saying, from her Husbands hand her hand Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light Oread or Dryad, or of Delia's Traine, Betook her to the Groves, but Delia's self In gate surpass'd and Goddess-like deport, Though not as shee with Bow and Quiver armd, But with such Gardning Tools as Are yet rude, Guiltless of fire had formd, or Angels brought, To Pales, or Pomona, thus adornd, Likest she seemd, Pomona when she fled Yet Virgin of Proserpina from Jove. Her long with ardent look his Eye pursu'd Delighted, but desiring more her stay. Oft he to her his charge of quick returne, Repeated, shee to him as oft engag'd To be returnd by Noon amid the Bowre, And all things in best order to invite Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose. O much deceav'd, much failing, hapless Eve, Of thy presum'd return! event perverse! Thou never from that houre in Paradise Foundst either sweet repast, or found repose; Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades Waited with hellish rancor imminent To intercept thy way, or send thee back For now, and since first break of dawne the Fiend, Meer Serpent in appearance, forth was come, And on his Quest, where likeliest he might finde The onely two of Mankinde, but in them The whole included Race, his purposd prey. In Bowre and Field he sought, where any tuft Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay, Thir tendance or Plantation for delight, By Fountain or by shadie Rivulet He sought them both, but wish'd his hap might find Eve separate, he wish'd, but not with hope Of what so seldom chanc'd, when to his wish, Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies, Veild in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood, Half spi'd, so thick the Roses bushing round About her glowd, oft stooping to support Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold, Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies Gently with Mirtle band, mindless the while, Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour, From her best prop so farr, and storm so nigh. Neerer he drew, and many a walk travers'd Of stateliest Covert, Cedar, Pine, or Palme, Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen Among thick-wov'n Arborets and Flours Imborderd on each Bank, the hand of Eve: Spot more delicious then those Gardens feign'd Or of reviv'd Adonis, or renownd Alcinous, host of old Laertes Son, Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King Much hee the Place admir'd, the Person more. As one who long in populous City pent, Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy the Aire, Forth issuing on a Summers Morn, to breathe Among the pleasant Villages and Farmes Adjoynd, from each thing met conceaves delight, The smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine, Or Dairie, each rural sight, each rural sound; If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass, What pleasing seemd, for her now pleases more, She most, and in her look summs all Delight. Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold This Flourie Plat, the sweet recess of Eve Thus earlie, thus alone; her Heav'nly forme Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine, Her graceful Innocence, her every Aire Of gesture or lest action overawd His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereav'd His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought: That space the Evil one abstracted stood From his own evil, and for the time remaind Stupidly good, of enmitie disarm'd, Of guile, of hate, of envie, of revenge; But the hot Hell that alwayes in him burnes, Though in mid Heav'n, soon ended his delight, And tortures him now more, the more he sees Of pleasure not for him ordain'd: then soon Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites. Thoughts, whither have he led me, with what sweet Compulsion thus transported to forget What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy, Save what is in destroying, other joy To me is lost. Then let me not let pass Occasion which now smiles, behold alone The Woman, opportune to all attempts, Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh, Whose higher intellectual more I shun, And strength, of courage hautie, and of limb Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould, Foe not informidable, exempt from wound, I not; so much hath Hell debas'd, and paine Infeebl'd me, to what I was in Heav'n. Shee fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods, Not terrible, though terrour be in Love And beautie, not approacht by stronger hate, Hate stronger, under shew of Love well feign'd, The way which to her ruin now I tend. So spake the Enemie of Mankind, enclos'd In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward Eve Address'd his way, not with indented wave, Prone on the ground, as since, but on his reare, Circular base of rising foulds, that tour'd Fould above fould a surging Maze, his Head Crested aloft, and Carbuncle his Eyes; With burnisht Neck of verdant Gold, erect Amidst his circling Spires, that on the grass Floted redundant: pleasing was his shape, And lovely, never since of Serpent kind Lovelier, not those that in Illyria chang'd In Epidaurus; nor to which transformd Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline was seen, Hee with Olympias, this with her who bore Scipio the highth of Rome. With tract oblique At first, as one who sought access, but feard To interrupt, side-long he works his way. As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind Veres oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her Saile; So varied hee, and of his tortuous Traine Curld many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve, To lure her Eye; shee busied heard the sound Of rusling Leaves, but minded not, as us'd To such disport before her through the Field, From every Beast, more duteous at her call, Then at Circean call the Herd disguis'd. Hee boulder now, uncall'd before her stood; But as in gaze admiring: Oft he bowd His turret Crest, and sleek enamel'd Neck, Fawning, and lick'd the ground whereon she trod. The Eye of Eve to mark his play; he glad Of her attention gaind, with Serpent Tongue Organic, or impulse of vocal Air, His fraudulent temptation thus began. Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps Thou canst, who art sole Wonder, much less arm Thy looks, the Heav'n of mildness, with disdain, Displeas'd that I approach thee thus, and gaze Insatiate, I thus single; nor have feard Thy awful brow, more awful thus retir'd. Fairest resemblance of thy Maker faire, Thee all living things gaze on, all things thine By gift, and thy Celestial Beautie adore With ravishment beheld, there best beheld Where universally admir'd; but here In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among, Beholders rude, and shallow to discerne Half what in thee is fair, one man except, Who sees thee? and what is one? who shouldst be seen A Goddess among Gods, ador'd and serv'd By Angels numberless, thy daily Train. So gloz'd the Tempter, and his Proem tun'd; Into the Heart of Eve his words made way, Though at the voice much marveling; at length Not unamaz'd she thus in answer spake. What may this mean? Language of Man pronounc't By Tongue of Brute, and human sense exprest? The first at lest of these I thought deni'd To Beasts, whom God on their Creation-Day Created mute to all articulat sound; The latter I demurre, for in thir looks Much reason, and in thir actions oft appeers. Thee, Serpent, suttlest beast of all the field I knew, but not with human voice endu'd; Redouble then this miracle, and say, How cam'st thou speakable of mute, and how To me so friendly grown above the rest Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight? Say, for such wonder claims attention due. To whom the guileful Tempter thus reply'd. Empress of this fair World, resplendent Eve, Easie to mee it is to tell thee all What thou commandst, and right thou shouldst be obeyd: I was at first as other Beasts that graze The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low, As was my food, nor aught but food discern'd Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high: Till on a day roaving the field, I chanc'd A goodly Tree farr distant to behold Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixt, Ruddie and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze; When from the boughes a savorie odour blow'n, Grateful to appetite, more pleas'd my sense Then smell of sweetest Fenel, or the Teats Of Ewe or Goat dropping with Milk at Eevn, Unsuckt of Lamb or Kid, that tend thir play. To satisfie the sharp desire I had Of tasting those fair Apples, I resolv'd Not to deferr; hunger and thirst at once, Powerful perswaders, quick'nd at the scent Of that alluring fruit, urg'd me so keene. About the Mossie Trunk I wound me soon, For high from ground the branches would require Thy utmost reach or Adams: Round the Tree All other Beasts that saw, with like desire Longing and envying stood, but could not reach. Amid the Tree now got, where plentie hung Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill I spar'd not, for such pleasure till that hour At Feed or Fountain never had I found. Sated at length, ere long I might perceave Strange alteration in me, to degree Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech Wanted not long, though to this shape retaind. Thenceforth to Speculations high or deep I turnd my thoughts, and with capacious mind Considerd all things visible in Heav'n, Or Earth, or Middle, all things fair and good; But all that fair and good in thy Divine Semblance, and in thy Beauties heav'nly Ray United I beheld; no Fair to thine Equivalent or second, which compel'd Mee thus, though importune perhaps, to come And gaze, and worship thee of right declar'd Sovran of Creatures, universal Dame. So talk'd the spirited sly Snake; and Eve Yet more amaz'd unwarie thus reply'd. Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt The vertue of that Fruit, in thee first prov'd: But say, where grows the Tree, from hence how far? For many are the Trees of God that grow In Paradise, and various, yet unknown To us, in such abundance lies our choice, As leaves a greater store of Fruit untoucht, Still hanging incorruptible, till men Grow up to thir provision, and more hands Help to disburden Nature of her Bearth. To whom the wilie Adder, blithe and glad. Empress, the way is readie, and not long, Fast by a Fountain, one small Thicket past Of blowing Myrrh and Balme; if thou accept My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon. Lead then, said Eve. Hee leading swiftly rowld In tangles, and make intricate seem strait, To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy Bright'ns his Crest, as when a wandring Fire Compact of unctuous vapor, which the Night Condenses, and the cold invirons round, Kindl'd through agitation to a Flame, Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends, Hovering and blazing with delusive Light, Misleads th' amaz'd Night-wanderer from his way To Boggs and Mires, & oft through Pond or Poole, There swallow'd up and lost, from succour farr. So glister'd the dire Snake and into fraud Led Eve our credulous Mother, to the Tree Of prohibition, root of all our woe; Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake. Serpent, we might have spar'd our coming hither, Fruitless to me, though Fruit be here to excess, The credit of whose vertue rest with thee, Wondrous indeed, if cause of such effects. But of this Tree we may not taste nor touch; God so commanded, and left that Command Sole Daughter of his voice; the rest, we live Law to our selves, our Reason is our Law. To whom the Tempter guilefully repli'd. Indeed? hath God then said that of the Fruit Of all these Garden Trees ye shall not eate, Yet Lords declar'd of all in Earth or Aire? To whom thus Eve yet sinless. Of the Fruit Of each Tree in the Garden we may eate, But of the Fruit of this fair Tree amidst The Garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eate Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, least ye die. She scarse had said, though brief, when now more bold The Tempter, but with shew of Zeale and Love To Man, and indignation at his wrong, New part puts on, and as to passion mov'd, Fluctuats disturbd, yet comely, and in act Rais'd, as of som great matter to begin. As when of old som Orator renound In Athens or free Rome, where Eloquence Flourishd, since mute, to som great cause addrest, Stood in himself collected, while each part, Motion, each act won audience ere the tongue, Somtimes in highth began, as no delay Of Preface brooking through his Zeal of Right. So standing, moving, or to highth upgrown The Tempter all impassiond thus began. O Sacred, Wise, and Wisdom-giving Plant, Mother of Science, Now I feel thy Power Within me cleere, not onely to discerne Things in thir Causes, but to trace the wayes Of highest Agents, deemd however wise. Queen of this Universe, doe not believe Those rigid threats of Death; ye shall not Die: How should ye? by the Fruit? it gives you Life To Knowledge? By the Threatner, look on mee, Mee who have touch'd and tasted, yet both live, And life more perfet have attaind then Fate Meant mee, by ventring higher then my Lot. Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast Is open? or will God incense his ire For such a pretty Trespass, and not praise Rather your dauntless vertue, whom the pain Of Death denounc't, whatever thing Death be, Deterrd not from atchieving what might leade To happier life, knowledge of Good and Evil; Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil Be real, why not known, since easier shunnd? God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just; Not just, not God; not feard then, nor obeid: Your feare it self of Death removes the feare. Why then was this forbid? Why but to awe, Why but to keep ye low and ignorant, His worshippers; he knows that in the day Ye Eate thereof, your Eyes that seem so cleere, Yet are but dim, shall perfetly be then Op'nd and cleerd, and ye shall be as Gods, Knowing both Good and Evil as they know. That ye should be as Gods, since I as Man, Internal Man, is but proportion meet, I of brute human, yee of human Gods. So ye shalt die perhaps, by putting off Human, to put on Gods, death to be wisht, Though threat'nd, which no worse then this can bring And what are Gods that Man may not become As they, participating God-like food? The Gods are first, and that advantage use On our belief, that all from them proceeds, I question it, for this fair Earth I see, Warm'd by the Sun, producing every kind, Them nothing: If they all things, who enclos'd Knowledge of Good and Evil in this Tree, That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies Th' offence, that Man should thus attain to know? What can your knowledge hurt him, or this Tree Impart against his will if all be his? Or is it envie, and can envie dwell In heav'nly brests? these, these and many more Causes import your need of this fair Fruit. Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste. He ended, and his words replete with guile Into her heart too easie entrance won: Fixt on the Fruit she gaz'd, which to behold Might tempt alone, and in her ears the sound Yet rung of his perswasive words, impregn'd With Reason, to her seeming, and with Truth; Meanwhile the hour of Noon drew on, and wak'd An eager appetite, rais'd by the smell So savorie of that Fruit, which with desire, Inclinable now grown to touch or taste, Sollicited her longing eye; yet first Pausing a while, thus to her self she mus'd. Great are thy Vertues, doubtless, best of Fruits, Though kept from Man, & worthy to be admir'd, Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay Gave elocution to the mute, and taught The Tongue not made for Speech to speak thy praise: Thy praise hee also who forbids thy use, Conceales not from us, naming thee the Tree Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil; Forbids us then to taste, but his forbidding Commends thee more, while it inferrs the good By thee communicated, and our want: For good unknown, sure is not had, or had And yet unknown, is as not had at all. In plain then, what forbids he but to know, Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise? Such prohibitions binde not. But if Death Bind us with after-bands, what profits then Our inward freedom? In the day we eate Of this fair Fruit, our doom is, we shall die. How dies the Serpent? hee hath eat'n and lives, And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discernes, Irrational till then. For us alone Was death invented? or to us deni'd This intellectual food, for beasts reserv'd? For Beasts it seems: yet that one Beast which first Hath tasted, envies not, but brings with joy The good befall'n him, Author unsuspect, Friendly to man, farr from deceit or guile. What fear I then, rather what know to feare Under this ignorance of Good and Evil, Here grows the Cure of all, this Fruit Divine, Fair to the Eye, inviting to the Taste, Of vertue to make wise: what hinders then To reach, and feed at once both Bodie and Mind? So saying, her rash hand in evil hour Forth reaching to the Fruit, she pluck'd, she eat: Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat Sighing through all her Works gave signs of woe, That all was lost. Back to the Thicket slunk The guiltie Serpent, and well might, for Eve Intent now wholly on her taste, naught else Regarded, such delight till then, as seemd, In Fruit she never tasted, whether true Or fansied so, through expectation high Of knowledg, nor was God-head from her thought. Greedily she ingorg'd without restraint, And knew not eating Death: Satiate at length, And hight'nd as with Wine, jocond and boon, Thus to her self she pleasingly began. O Sovran, vertuous, precious of all Trees In Paradise, of operation blest To Sapience, hitherto obscur'd, infam'd, And thy fair Fruit let hang, as to no end Created; but henceforth my early care, Not without Song, each Morning, and due praise Shall tend thee, and the fertil burden ease Of thy full branches offer'd free to all; Till dieted by thee I grow mature In knowledge, as the Gods who all things know; Though others envie what they cannot give; For had the gift bin theirs, it had not here Thus grown. Experience, next to thee I owe, Best guide; not following thee, I had remaind In ignorance, thou op'nst Wisdoms way, And giv'st access, though secret she retire. And I perhaps am secret; Heav'n is high, High and remote to see from thence distinct Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps May have diverted from continual watch Our great Forbidder, safe with all his Spies About him. But to Adam in what sort Shall I appeer? shall I to him make known As yet my change, and give him to partake Full happiness with mee, or rather not, But keep the odds of Knowledge in my power Without Copartner? so to add what wants In Femal Sex, the more to draw his Love, And render me more equal, and perhaps A thing not undesireable, somtime Superior; for inferior who is free? This may be well: but what if God have seen, And Death ensue? then I shall be no more, And Adam wedded to another Eve, Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct; A death to think. Confirm'd then I resolve, Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe: So dear I love him, that with him all deaths I could endure; without him live no life. So saying, from the Tree her step she turnd, But first low Reverence don, as to the power That dwelt within, whose presence had infus'd Into the plant sciential sap, deriv'd From Nectar, drink of Gods. Adam the while Waiting desirous her return, had wove Of choicest Flours a Garland to adorne Her Tresses, and her rural labours crown As Reapers oft are wont thir Harvest Queen. Great joy he promis'd to his thoughts, and new Solace in her return, so long delay'd; Yet oft his heart, divine of somthing ill, Misgave him; hee the faultring measure felt; And forth to meet her went, the way she took That Morn when first they parted; by the Tree Of Knowledge he must pass, there he her met, Scarse from the Tree returning; in her hand A bough of fairest fruit that downie smil'd, New gatherd, and ambrosial smell diffus'd. To him she hasted, in her face excuse Came Prologue, and Apologie to prompt, Which with bland words at will she thus addrest. Hast thou not wonderd, Adam, at my stay? Thee I have misst, and thought it long, depriv'd Thy presence, agonie of love till now Not felt, nor shall be twice, for never more Mean I to trie, what rash untri'd I sought, The paine of absence from thy sight. But strange Hath bin the cause, and wonderful to heare: This Tree is not as we are told, a Tree Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown Op'ning the way, but of Divine effect To open Eyes, and make them Gods who taste; And hath bin tasted such; the Serpent wise, Or not restraind as wee, or not obeying, Hath eat'n of the fruit, and is become, Not dead, as we are threatn'd, but thenceforth Endu'd with human voice and human sense, Reasoning to admiration, and with mee Perswasively hath so prevaild, that I Have also tasted, and have also found Th' effects to correspond, opener mine Eyes, Dimm erst, dilated Spirits, ampler Heart, And growing up to Godhead; which for thee Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise. For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss, Tedious, unshar'd with thee, and odious soon. Thou therefore also taste, that equal Lot May joyne us, equal Joy, as equal Love; Least thou not tasting, different degree Disjoyne us, and I then too late renounce Deitie for thee, when Fate will not permit. Thus Eve with Countnance blithe her storie told; But in her Cheek distemper flushing glowd. On th' other side, Adam, soon as he heard The fatal Trespass don by Eve, amaz'd, Astonied stood and Blank, while horror chill Ran through his veins, and all his joynts relax'd; From his slack hand the Garland wreath'd for Eve Down drop'd, and all the faded Roses shed: Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length First to himself he inward silence broke. O fairest of Creation, last and best Of all Gods Works, Creature in whom excell'd Whatever can to fight or thought be found, Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet! How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost, Defac't, deflourd, and now to Death devote? Rather how hast thou yeelded to transgress The strict forbiddance, how to violate The sacred Fruit forbidd'n! som cursed fraud Of Enemie hath beguil'd thee, yet unknown, And mee with thee hath ruind, for with thee Certain my resolution is to Die; How can I live without thee, how forgoe Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly joyn'd, To live again in these wilde Woods forlorn? Should God create another Eve, and I Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee Would never from my heart; no no, I feel The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh, Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe. So having said, as one from sad dismay Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbd Submitting to what seemd remediless, Thus in calme mood his Words to Eve he turnd. Bold deed thou hast presum'd, adventrous Eve, And peril great provok't, who thus hast dar'd Had it bin onely coveting to Eye That sacred Fruit, sacred to abstinence, Much more to taste it under banne to touch. But past who can recall, or don undoe? Not God omnipotent, for Fate, yet so Perhaps thou shalt not Die, perhaps the Fact Is not so hainous now, foretasted Fruit, Profan'd first by the Serpent, by him first Made common and unhallowd: ere one tastes; Nor yet on him found deadly; he yet lives, Lives, as thou saidst, and gaines to live as Man Higher degree of Life, inducement strong To us, as likely tasting to attaine Proportional ascent, which cannot be But to be Gods, or Angels Demi-gods. Nor can I think that God, Creator wise, Though threatning, will in earnest so destroy Us his prime Creatures, dignifi'd so high, Set over all his Works, which in our Fall, For us created, needs with us must faile, Dependent made; so God shall uncreate, Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour loose, Not well conceav'd of God, who though his Power Creation could repeate, yet would be loath Us to abolish, least the Adversary Triumph and say; Fickle their State whom God Most Favors, who can please him long? Mee first He ruind, now Mankind; whom will he next? Matter of scorne, not to be given the Foe. However I with thee have fixt my Lot, Certain to undergoe like doom, if Death Consort with thee, Death is to mee as Life; So forcible within my heart I feel The Bond of Nature draw me to my owne, My own in thee, for what thou art is mine; Our State cannot be severd, we are one, One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self. So Adam, and thus Eve to him repli'd. O glorious trial of exceeding Love, Illustrious evidence, example high! Ingaging me to emulate, but short Of thy perfection, how shall I attaine, Adam, from whose deare side I boast me sprung, And gladly of our Union heare thee speak, One Heart, one Soul in both; whereof good prooff This day affords, declaring thee resolvd, Rather then Death or aught then Death more dread Shall separate us, linkt in Love so deare, To undergoe with mee one Guilt, one Crime, If any be, of tasting this fair Fruit, Whose vertue, for of good still good proceeds, Direct, or by occasion hath presented This happie trial of thy Love, which else So eminently never had bin known. Were it I thought Death menac't would ensue This my attempt, I would sustain alone The worst, and not perswade thee, rather die Deserted, then oblige thee with a fact Pernicious to thy Peace, chiefly assur'd Remarkably so late of thy so true, So faithful Love unequald; but I feel Farr otherwise th' event, not Death, but Life Augmented, op'nd Eyes, new Hopes, new Joyes, Taste so Divine, that what of sweet before Hath toucht my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh. On my experience, Adam, freely taste, And fear of Death deliver to the Windes. So saying, she embrac'd him, and for joy Tenderly wept, much won that he his Love Had so enobl'd, as of choice to incurr Divine displeasure for her sake, or Death. In recompence for such compliance bad Such recompence best merits from the bough She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit With liberal hand: he scrupl'd not to eat Against his better knowledge, not deceav'd, But fondly overcome with Femal charm. Earth trembl'd from her entrails, as again In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan, Skie lowr'd, and muttering Thunder, som sad drops Wept at compleating of the mortal Sin Original; while Adam took no thought, Eating his fill, nor Eve to iterate Her former trespass fear'd, the more to soothe Him with her lov'd societie, that now As with new Wine intoxicated both They swim in mirth, and fansie that they feel Divinitie within them breeding wings Wherewith to scorn the Earth: but that false Fruit Farr other operation first displaid, Carnal desire enflaming, hee on Eve Began to cast lascivious Eyes, she him As wantonly repaid; in Lust they burne: Till Adam thus 'gan Eve to dalliance move. Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste, And elegant, of Sapience no small part, Since to each meaning savour we apply, And Palate call judicious; I the praise Yeild thee, so well this day thou hast purvey'd. Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstain'd From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be In things to us forbidden, it might be wish'd, For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten. But come, so well refresh't, now let us play, As meet is, after such delicious Fare; For never did thy Beautie since the day I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorn'd With all perfections, so enflame my sense With ardor to enjoy thee, fairer now Then ever, bountie of this vertuous Tree. So said he, and forbore not glance or toy Of amorous intent, well understood Of Eve, whose Eye darted contagious Fire. Her hand he seis'd, and to a shadie bank, Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowr'd He led her nothing loath; Flours were the Couch, And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest lap. There they thir fill of Love and Loves disport Took largely, of thir mutual guilt the Seale, The solace of thir sin, till dewie sleep Oppress'd them, wearied with thir amorous play. Soon as the force of that fallacious Fruit, That with exhilerating vapour bland About thir spirits had plaid, and inmost powers Made erre, was now exhal'd, and grosser sleep Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams Encumberd, now had left them, up they rose As from unrest, and each the other viewing, Soon found thir Eyes how op'nd, and thir minds How dark'nd; innocence, that as a veile Had shadow'd them from knowing ill, was gon, Just confidence, and native righteousness, And honour from about them, naked left To guiltie shame hee cover'd, but his Robe Uncover'd more. So rose the Danite strong Herculean Samson from the Harlot-lap Of Philistean Dalilah, and wak'd Shorn of his strength, They destitute and bare Of all thir vertue: silent, and in face Confounded long they sate, as struck'n mute, Till Adam, though not less then Eve abasht, At length gave utterance to these words constraind. O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give care To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught To counterfet Mans voice, true in our Fall, False in our promis'd Rising; since our Eyes Op'nd we find indeed, and find we know Both Good and Evil, Good lost and Evil got, Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know, Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void, Our wonted Ornaments now soild and staind, And in our Faces evident the signes Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store; Even shame, the last of evils; of the first Be sure then. How shall I behold the face Henceforth of God or Angel, earst with joy And rapture so oft beheld? those heav'nly shapes Will dazle now this earthly, with thir blaze Insufferably bright. O might I here In solitude live savage, in some glad Obscur'd, where highest Woods impenetrable To Starr or Sun-light, spread thir umbrage broad, And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines, Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs Hide me, where I may never see them more. But let us now, as in bad plight, devise What best may for the present serve to hide The Parts of each from other, that seem most To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen, Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowd, And girded on our loyns, may cover round Those middle parts, that this new commer, Shame, There sit not, and reproach us as unclean. So counsel'd hee, and both together went Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renown'd, But such as at this day to Indians known In Malabar or Decan spreds her Armes Braunching so broad and long, that in the ground The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow About the Mother Tree, a Pillard shade High overarch't, and echoing Walks between; There oft the Indian Herdsman shunning heate Shelters in coole, and tends his pasturing Herds At Loopholes cut through thickest shade: Those Leaves They gatherd, broad as Amazonian Targe, And with what skill they had, together sowd, To gird thir waste, vain Covering if to hide Thir guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike To that first naked Glorie. Such of late Columbus found th' American to girt With featherd Cincture, naked else and wilde Among the Trees on Iles and woodie Shores. Thus fenc't, and as they thought, thir shame in part Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind, They sate them down to weep, nor onely Teares Raind at thir Eyes, but high Winds worse within Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate, Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore Thir inward State of Mind, calme Region once And full of Peace, now tost and turbulent: For Understanding rul'd not, and the Will Heard not her lore, both in subjection now To sensual Appetite, who from beneathe Usurping over sovran Reason claimd Superior sway: From thus distemperd brest, Adam, estrang'd in look and alterd stile, Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewd. Would thou hadst heark'nd to my words, & stai'd With me, as I besought thee, when that strange Desire of wandring this unhappie Morn, I know not whence possessd thee; we had then Remaind still happie, not as now, despoild Of all our good, sham'd, naked, miserable. Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek Such proof, conclude, they then begin to faile. To whom soon mov'd with touch of blame thus Eve. What words have past thy Lips, Adam severe, Imput'st thou that to my default, or will Of wandering, as thou call'st it, which who knows But might as ill have happ'nd thou being by, Or to thy self perhaps: hadst thou bin there, Or bere th' attempt, thou couldst not have discernd Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake; No ground of enmitie between us known, Why hee should mean me ill, or seek to harme. Was I to have never parted from thy side? As good have grown there still a liveless Rib. Being as I am, why didst not thou the Head Command me absolutely not to go, Going into such danger as thou saidst? Too facil then thou didst not much gainsay, Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss. Hadst thou bin firm and fixt in thy dissent, Neither had I transgress'd, nor thou with mee. To whom then first incenst Adam repli'd. Is this the Love, is the recompence Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve, exprest Immutable when thou wert lost, not I, Who might have liv'd and joyd immortal bliss, Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee: And am I now upbraided, as the cause Of thy transgressing? not enough severe, It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more? I warn'd thee, I admonish'd thee, foretold The danger, and the lurking Enemie That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force, And force upon free Will hath here no place. But confidence then bore thee on, secure Either to meet no danger, or to finde Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps I also err'd in overmuch admiring What seemd in thee so perfet, that I thought No evil durst attempt thee, but I rue That errour now, which is become my crime, And thou th' accuser. Thus it shall befall Him who to worth in Women overtrusting Lets her Will rule; restraint she will not brook, And left to her self, if evil thence ensue, Shee first his weak indulgence will accuse. Thus they in mutual accusation spent The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning And of thir vain contest appeer'd no end. Meanwhile the hainous and despightfull act Of Satan done in Paradise, and how Hee in the Serpent had perverted Eve, Her Husband shee, to taste the fatall fruit, Was known in Heav'n; for what can scape the Eye Of God All-seeing, or deceave his Heart Omniscient, who in all things wise and just, Hinder'd not Satan to attempt the minde Of Man, with strength entire, and free Will arm'd, Complete to have discover'd and repulst Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend. For still they knew, and ought to have still remember'd The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit, Whoever tempted; which they not obeying, Incurr'd, what could they less, the penaltie, And manifold in sin, deserv'd to fall. Up into Heav'n from Paradise in hast Th' Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad For Man, for of his state by this they knew, Much wondring how the suttle Fiend had stoln Entrance unseen. Soon as th' unwelcome news From Earth arriv'd at Heaven Gate, displeas'd All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare That time Celestial visages, yet mixt With pitie, violated not thir bliss. About the new-arriv'd, in multitudes Th' ethereal People ran, to hear and know How all befell: they towards the Throne Supream Accountable made haste to make appear With righteous plea, thir utmost vigilance, And easily approv'd; when the most High Eternal Father from his secret Cloud, Amidst in Thunder utter'd thus his voice. Assembl'd Angels, and ye Powers return'd From unsuccessful charge, be not dismaid, Nor troubl'd at these tidings from the Earth, Which your sincerest care could not prevent, Foretold so lately what would come to pass, When first this Tempter cross'd the Gulf from Hell. I told ye then he should prevail and speed On his bad Errand, Man should be seduc't And flatter'd out of all, believing lies Against his Maker; no Decree of mine Concurring to necessitate his Fall, Or touch with lightest moment of impulse His free Will, to her own inclining left In eevn scale. But fall'n he is, and now What rests, but that the mortal Sentence pass On his transgression, Death denounc't that day, Which he presumes already vain and void, Because not yet inflicted, as he fear'd, By some immediate stroak; but soon shall find Forbearance no acquittance ere day end. Justice shall not return as bountie scorn'd. But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferr'd All Judgement, whether in Heav'n, or Earth; or Hell. Easie it may be seen that I intend Mercie collegue with Justice, sending thee Mans Friend, his Mediator, his design'd Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntarie, And destin'd Man himself to judge Man fall'n. So spake the Father, and unfoulding bright Toward the right hand his Glorie, on the Son Blaz'd forth unclouded Deitie; he full Resplendent all his Father manifest Express'd, and thus divinely answer'd milde. Father Eternal, thine is to decree, Mine both in Heav'n and Earth to do thy will Supream, that thou in mee thy Son belov'd Mayst ever rest well pleas'd. I go to judge On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou knowst, Whoever judg'd, the worst on mee must light, When time shall be, for so I undertook Before thee; and not repenting, this obtaine Of right, that I may mitigate thir doom On me deriv'd, yet I shall temper so Justice with Mercie, as may illustrate most Them fully satisfied, and thee appease. Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none Are to behold the Judgement, but the judg'd, Those two; the third best absent is condemn'd, Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law Conviction to the Serpent none belongs. Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose Of high collateral glorie: him Thrones and Powers, Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence Eden and all the Coast in prospect lay. Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes wing'd. Now was the Sun in Western cadence low From Noon, and gentle Aires due at thir hour To fan the Earth now wak'd, and usher in The Eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard Now walking in the Garden, by soft windes Brought to thir Ears, while day declin'd, they heard And from his presence hid themselves among The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God Approaching, thus to Adam call'd aloud. Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet My coming seen far off? I miss thee here, Not pleas'd, thus entertaind with solitude, Where obvious dutie erewhile appear'd unsaught: Or come I less conspicuous, or what change Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth. He came, and with him Eve, more loth, though first To offend, discount'nanc't both, and discompos'd; Love was not in thir looks, either to God Or to each other, but apparent guilt, And shame, and perturbation, and despaire, Anger, and obstinacie, and hate, and guile. Whence Adam faultring long, thus answer'd brief. I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice Affraid, being naked, hid my self. To whom The gracious Judge without revile repli'd. My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear'd, But still rejoyc't, how is it now become So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who Hath told thee? hast thou eaten of the Tree Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat? To whom thus Adam sore beset repli'd. O Heav'n! in evil strait this day I stand Before my Judge, either to undergoe My self the total Crime, or to accuse My other self, the partner of my life; Whose failing, while her Faith to me remaines, I should conceal, and not expose to blame By my complaint; but strict necessitie Subdues me, and calamitous constraint, Least on my head both sin and punishment, However insupportable, be all Devolv'd; though should I hold my peace, yet thou Wouldst easily detect what I conceale. This Woman whom thou mad'st to be my help, And gav'st me as thy perfet gift, so good, So fit, so acceptable, so Divine, That from her hand I could suspect no ill, And what she did, whatever in it self, Her doing seem'd to justifie the deed; Shee gave me of the Tree, and I did eate. To whom the sovran Presence thus repli'd. Was shee thy God, that her thou didst obey Before his voice, or was shee made thy guide, Superior, or but equal, that to her Thou did'st resigne thy Manhood, and the Place Wherein God set thee above her made of thee, And for thee, whose perfection farr excell'd Hers in all real dignitie: Adornd She was indeed, and lovely to attract Were such as under Government well seem'd, Unseemly to beare rule, which was thy part And person, had'st thou known thy self aright. So having said, he thus to Eve in few: Say Woman, what is this which thou hast done? To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelm'd, Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge Bold or loquacious, thus abasht repli'd. The Serpent me beguil'd and I did eate. Which when the Lord God heard, without delay To Judgement he proceeded on th' accus'd Serpent though brute, unable to transferre The Guilt on him who made him instrument Of mischief, and polluted from the end Of his Creation; justly then accurst, As vitiated in Nature: more to know Concern'd not Man since he no further knew Nor alter'd his offence; yet God at last To Satan first in sin his doom apply'd, Though in mysterious terms, judg'd as then best: And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall. Because thou hast done this, thou art accurst Above all Cattel, each Beast of the Field; Upon thy Belly groveling thou shalt goe, And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life. Between Thee and the Woman I will put Enmitie, and between thine and her Seed; Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel. So spake this Oracle, then verifi'd When Jesus son of Mary second Eve, Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heav'n, Prince of the Aire; then rising from his Grave Spoild Principalities and Powers, triumpht In open shew, and with ascention bright Captivity led captive through the Aire, The Realme it self of Satan long usurpt, Whom he shall tread at last under our feet; Eevn hee who now foretold his fatal bruise, And to the Woman thus his Sentence turn'd. Thy sorrow I will greatly multiplie By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will Thine shall submit, hee over thee shall rule. On Adam last thus judgement he pronounc'd. Because thou hast heark'nd to the voice of thy Wife, And eaten of the Tree concerning which I charg'd thee, saying: Thou shalt not eate thereof, Curs'd is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow Shalt eate thereof all the days of thy Life; Thornes also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth Unbid, and thou shalt eate th' Herb of th' Field, In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eate Bread, Till thou return unto the ground, for thou Out of the ground wast taken, know thy Birth, For dust thou art, and shalt to dust returne. So judg'd he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent, And th' instant stroke of Death denounc't that day Remov'd farr off; then pittying how they stood Before him naked to the aire, that now Must suffer change, disdain'd not to begin Thenceforth the forme of servant to assume, As when he wash'd his servants feet, so now As Father of his Familie he clad Thir nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain, Or as the Snake with youthful Coate repaid; And thought not much to cloath his Enemies: Nor hee thir outward onely with the Skins Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness, Araying cover'd from his Fathers sight. To him with swift ascent he up returnd, Into his blissful bosom reassum'd In glory as of old, to him appeas'd All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man Recounted, mixing intercession sweet. Meanwhile ere thus was sin'd and judg'd on Earth, Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death, In counterview within the Gates, that now Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame Farr into Chaos, since the Fiend pass'd through, Sin opening, who thus now to Death began. O Son, why sit we here each other viewing Idlely, while Satan our great Author thrives In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides For us his ofspring deare? It cannot be But that success attends him; if mishap, Ere this he had return'd, with fury driv'n By his Avenger, since no place like this Can fit his punishment, or their revenge. Methinks I feel new strength within me rise, Wings growing, and Dominion giv'n me large Beyond this Deep; whatever drawes me on, Or sympathie, or som connatural force Powerful at greatest distance to unite With secret amity things of like kinde By secretest conveyance. Thou my Shade Inseparable must with mee along: For Death from Sin no power can separate. But least the difficultie of passing back Stay his returne perhaps over this Gulfe Impassable, impervious, let us try Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine Not unagreeable, to found a path Over this Maine from Hell to that new World Where Satan now prevailes, a Monument Of merit high to all th' infernal Host, Easing thir passage hence, for intercourse, Or transmigration, as thir lot shall lead. Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn By this new felt attraction and instinct. Whom thus the meager Shadow answerd soon. Goe whither Fate and inclination strong Leads thee, I shall not lag behinde, nor erre The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste The savour of Death from all things there that live: Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid. So saying, with delight he snuff'd the smell Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote, Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lur'd With sent of living Carcasses design'd For death, the following day, in bloodie fight. So sented the grim Feature, and upturn'd His Nostril wide into the murkie Air, Sagacious of his Quarrey from so farr. Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste Wide Anarchie of Chaos damp and dark Flew divers, & with Power thir Power was great Hovering upon the Waters; what they met Solid or slimie, as in raging Sea Tost up and down, together crowded drove From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell. As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse Upon the Cronian Sea, together drive Mountains of Ice, that stop th' imagin'd way Beyond Petsora Eastward, to the rich Cathaian Coast. The aggregated Soyle Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry, As with a Trident smote, and fix't as firm As Delos floating once; the rest his look Bound with Gorgonian rigor not to move, And with Asphaltic slime; broad as the Gate, Deep to the Roots of Hell the gather'd beach They fasten'd, and the Mole immense wraught on Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge Of length prodigious joyning to the Wall Immoveable of this now fenceless world Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad, Smooth, easie, inoffensive down to Hell. So, if great things to small may be compar'd, Xerxes, the Libertie of Greece to yoke, From Susa his Memnonian Palace high Came to the Sea, and over Hellespont Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joyn'd, And scourg'd with many a stroak th' indignant waves. Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock Over the vext Abyss, following the track Of Satan, to the selfsame place where hee First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe From out of Chaos to the outside bare Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made And durable; and now in little space The Confines met of Empyrean Heav'n And of this World, and on the left hand Hell With long reach interpos'd; three sev'ral wayes In sight, to each of these three places led. And now thir way to Earth they had descri'd, To Paradise first tending, when behold Satan in likeness of an Angel bright Betwixt the Centaure and the Scorpion stearing His Zenith, while the Sun in Aries rose: Disguis'd he came, but those his Children dear Thir Parent soon discern'd, though in disguise. Hee, after Eve seduc't, unminded slunk Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded Upon her Husband, saw thir shame that sought Vain covertures; but when he saw descend The Son of God to judge them, terrifi'd Hee fled, not hoping to escape, but shun The present, fearing guiltie what his wrauth Might suddenly inflict; that past, return'd By Night, and listning where the hapless Paire Sate in thir sad discourse, and various plaint, Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood Not instant, but of future time. With joy And tidings fraught, to Hell he now return'd, And at the brink of Chaos, neer the foot Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop't Met who to meet him came, his Ofspring dear. Great joy was at thir meeting, and at sight Of that stupendious Bridge his joy encreas'd. Long hee admiring stood, till Sin, his faire Inchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke. O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds, Thy Trophies, which thou view'st as not thine own, Thou art thir Author and prime Architect: For I no sooner in my Heart divin'd, My Heart, which by a secret harmonie Still moves with thine, joyn'd in connexion sweet, That thou on Earth hadst prosper'd, which thy looks Now also evidence, but straight I felt Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt That I must after thee with this thy Son; Such fatal consequence unites us three: Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds, Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure Detain from following thy illustrious track. Thou hast atchiev'd our libertie, confin'd Within Hell Gates till now, thou us impow'rd To fortifie thus farr, and overlay With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss. Thine now is all this World, thy vertue hath won What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gain'd With odds what Warr hath lost, and fully aveng'd Our foile in Heav'n; here thou shalt Monarch reign, There didst not; there let him still Victor sway, As Battel hath adjudg'd, from this new World Retiring, by his own doom alienated, And henceforth Monarchie with thee divide Of all things, parted by th' Empyreal bounds, His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World, Or trie thee now more dang'rous to his Throne. Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answerd glad. Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both, High proof ye now have giv'n to be the Race Of Satan for I glorie in the name, Antagonist of Heav'ns Almightie King Amply have merited of me, of all Th' Infernal Empire, that so neer Heav'ns dore Triumphal with triumphal act have met, Mine with this glorious Work, & made one Realm Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent Of easie thorough-fare. Therefore while I Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease To my associate Powers, them to acquaint With these successes, and with them rejoyce, You two this way, among those numerous Orbs All yours, right down to Paradise descend; There dwell & Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth Dominion exercise and in the Aire, Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declar'd, Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill. My Substitutes I send ye, and Create Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might Issuing from mee: on your joynt vigor now My hold of this new Kingdom all depends, Through Sin to Death expos'd by my exploit. If your joynt power prevaile, th' affaires of Hell No detriment need feare, goe and be strong. So saying he dismiss'd them, they with speed Thir course through thickest Constellations held Spreading thir bane; the blasted Starrs lookt wan, And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclips Then sufferd. Th' other way Satan went down The Causey to Hell Gate; on either side Disparted Chaos over built exclaimd, And with rebounding surge the barrs assaild, That scorn'd his indignation: through the Gate, Wide open and unguarded, Satan pass'd, And all about found desolate; for those Appointed to sit there, had left thir charge, Flown to the upper World; the rest were all Farr to the inland retir'd, about the walls Of Pandemonium, Citie and proud seate Of Lucifer, so by allusion calld, Of that bright Starr to Satan paragond. There kept thir Watch the Legions, while the Grand In Council sate, sollicitous what chance Might intercept thir Emperour sent, so hee Departing gave command, and they observ'd. As when the Tartar from his Russian Foe By Astracan over the Snowie Plaines Retires, or Bactrian Sophi from the hornes Of Turkish Crescent, leaves all waste beyond The Realme of Aladule, in his retreate To Tauris or Casbeen. So these the late Heav'n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell Many a dark League, reduc't in careful Watch Round thir Metropolis, and now expecting Each hour their great adventurer from the search Of Forrein Worlds: he through the midst unmarkt, In shew plebeian Angel militant Of lowest order, past; and from the dore Of that Plutonian Hall, invisible Ascended his high Throne, which under state Of richest texture spred, at th' upper end Was plac't in regal lustre. Down a while He sate, and round about him saw unseen: At last as from a Cloud his fulgent head And shape Starr bright appeer'd, or brighter, clad With what permissive glory since his fall Was left him, or false glitter: All amaz'd At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng Bent thir aspect, and whom they wish'd beheld, Thir mighty Chief returnd: loud was th' acclaime: Forth rush'd in haste the great consulting Peers, Rais'd from thir dark Divan, and with like joy Congratulant approach'd him, who with hand Silence, and with these words attention won. For in possession such, not onely of right, I call ye and declare ye now, returnd Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth Triumphant out of this infernal Pit Abominable, accurst, the house of woe, And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess, As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven Little inferiour, by my adventure hard With peril great atchiev'd. Long were to tell What I have don, what sufferd, with what paine Voyag'd the unreal, vast, unbounded deep Of horrible confusion, over which By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav'd To expedite your glorious march; but I Toild out my uncouth passage, forc't to ride Th' untractable Abysse, plung'd in the womb Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wilde, That jealous of thir secrets fiercely oppos'd My journey strange, with clamorous uproare Protesting Fate supreame; thence how I found The new created World, which fame in Heav'n Long had foretold, a Fabrick wonderful Of absolute perfection, therein Man Plac't in a Paradise, by our exile Made happie: Him by fraud I have seduc'd From his Creator, and the more to increase Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv'n up Both his beloved Man and all his World, To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us, Without our hazard, labour or allarme, To range in, and to dwell, and over Man To rule, as over all he should have rul'd. True is, mee also he hath judg'd, or rather Mee not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape Man I deceav'd: that which to mee belongs, Is enmity, which he will put between Mee and Mankinde; I am to bruise his heel; His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head: A World who would not purchase with a bruise, Or much more grievous pain? Ye have th' account Of my performance: What remaines, ye Gods, But up and enter now into full bliss. So having said, a while he stood, expecting Thir universal shout and high applause To fill his eare, when contrary he hears On all sides, from innumerable tongues A dismal universal hiss, the sound Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long Had leasure, wondring at himself now more; His Visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare, His Armes clung to his Ribs, his Leggs entwining Each other, till supplanted down he fell A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone, Reluctant, but in vaine, a greater power Now rul'd him, punisht in the shape he sin'd, According to his doom: he would have spoke, But hiss for hiss returnd with forked tongue To forked tongue, for now were all transform'd Alike, to Serpents all as accessories To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now With complicated monsters, head and taile, Scorpion and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire, Cerastes hornd, Hydrus, and Ellops drear, And Dipsas Not so thick swarm'd once the Soil Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle Ophiusa but still greatest hee the midst, Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun Ingenderd in the Pythian Vale on slime, Huge Python, and his Power no less he seem'd Above the rest still to retain; they all Him follow'd issuing forth to th' open Field, Where all yet left of that revolted Rout Heav'n-fall'n, in station stood or just array, Sublime with expectation when to see In Triumph issuing forth thir glorious Chief; They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell, And horrid sympathie; for what they saw, They felt themselvs now changing; down thir arms, Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast, And the dire hiss renew'd, and the dire form Catcht by Contagion, like in punishment, As in thir crime. Thus was th' applause they meant, Turnd to exploding hiss, triumph to shame Cast on themselves from thir own mouths. There stood A Grove hard by, sprung up with this thir change, His will who reigns above, to aggravate Thir penance, laden with fair Fruit, like that Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve Us'd by the Tempter: on that prospect strange Thir earnest eyes they fix'd, imagining For one forbidden Tree a multitude Now ris'n, to work them furder woe or shame; Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce, Though to delude them sent, could not abstain, But on they rould in heaps, and up the Trees Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks That curld Megaera: greedily they pluck'd The Frutage fair to sight, like that which grew Neer that bituminous Lake where Sodom flam'd; This more delusive, not the touch, but taste Deceav'd; they fondly thinking to allay Thir appetite with gust, instead of Fruit Chewd bitter Ashes, which th' offended taste With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayd, Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as oft, With hatefullest disrelish writh'd thir jaws With foot and cinders fill'd; so oft they fell Into the same illusion, not as Man Whom they triumph'd once lapst. Thus were they plagu'd And worn with Famin, long and ceasless hiss, Till thir lost shape, permitted, they resum'd, Yearly enjoynd, some say, to undergo This annual humbling certain number'd days, To dash thir pride, and joy for Man seduc't. However some tradition they dispers'd Among the Heathen of thir purchase got, And Fabl'd how the Serpent, whom they calld Ophion with Eurynome, the wide- Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driv'n And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born. Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair Too soon arriv'd, Sin there in power before, Once actual, now in body, and to dwell Habitual habitant; behind her Death Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet On his pale Horse: to whom Sin thus began. Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death, What thinkst thou of our Empire now, though earnd With travail difficult, not better farr Then stil at Hels dark threshold to have sate watch, Unnam'd, undreaded, and thy self half starv'd? Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answerd soon. To mee, who with eternal Famin pine, There best, where most with ravin I may meet; Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps. To whom th' incestuous Mother thus repli'd. Thou therefore on these Herbs, and Fruits, & Flours Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Fowle, No homely morsels, and whatever thing The Sithe of Time mowes down, devour unspar'd, Till I in Man residing through the Race, His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect, And season him thy last and sweetest prey. This said, they both betook them several wayes, Both to destroy, or unimmortal make All kinds, and for destruction to mature Sooner or later; which th' Almightie seeing, From his transcendent Seat the Saints among, To those bright Orders utterd thus his voice. See with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance To waste and havoc yonder World, which I So fair and good created, and had still Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man Let in these wastful Furies, who impute Folly to mee, so doth the Prince of Hell And his Adherents, that with so much ease I suffer them to enter and possess A place so heav'nly, and conniving seem To gratifie my scornful Enemies, That laugh, as if transported with some fit Of Passion, I to them had quitted all, At random yeilded up to their misrule; And know not that I call'd and drew them thither My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed On what was pure, till cramm'd and gorg'd, nigh burst With suckt and glutted offal, at one fling Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son, Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave at last Through Chaos hurld, obstruct the mouth of Hell For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jawes. Then Heav'n and Earth renewd shall be made pure To sanctitie that shall receive no staine: Till then the Curse pronounc't on both precedes. Hee ended, and the heav'nly Audience loud Sung Halleluia, as the sound of Seas, Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways, Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son, Destin'd restorer of Mankind, by whom New Heav'n and Earth shall to the Ages rise, Or down from Heav'n descend. Such was thir song, While the Creator calling forth by name His mightie Angels gave them several charge, As sorted best with present things. The Sun Had first his precept so to move, so shine, As might affect the Earth with cold and heat Scarce tollerable, and from the North to call Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring Solstitial summers heat. To the blanc Moone Her office they prescrib'd, to th' other five Thir planetarie motions and aspects Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixt Thir influence malignant when to showre, Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling, Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set Thir corners, when with bluster to confound Sea, Aire, and Shoar, the Thunder when to rowle With terror through the dark Aereal Hall. Some say he bid his Angels turne ascanse The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more From the Suns Axle; they with labour push'd Was bid turn Reines from th' Equinoctial Rode Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seav'n Up to the Tropic Crab; thence down amaine As deep as Capricorne, to bring in change Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring Perpetual smil'd on Earth with vernant Flours, Equal in Days and Nights, except to those Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day Had unbenighted shon, while the low Sun To recompence his distance, in thir sight Had rounded still th' Horizon, and not known Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow From cold Estotiland, and South as farr Beneath Magellan. At that tasted Fruit The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turn'd His course intended; else how had the World Inhabited, though sinless, more then now, Avoided pinching cold and scorching heate? These changes in the Heav'ns, though slow, produc'd Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast, Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot, Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shoar Bursting thir brazen Dungeon, armd with ice And snow and haile and stormie gust and flaw, Boreas and Caecias and Argestes loud And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn; With adverse blast up-turns them from the South Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent Windes Eurus and Zephir with thir lateral noise, Sirocco, and Libecchio. Thus began Outrage from liveless things; but Discord first Daughter of Sin, among th' irrational, Death introduc'd through fierce antipathie: Beast now with Beast gan war, & Fowle with Fowle, And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving, Devourd each other; nor stood much in awe Of Man, but fled him, or with count'nance grim Glar'd on him passing: these were from without The growing miseries, which Adam saw Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomiest shade, To sorrow abandond, but worse felt within, And in a troubl'd Sea of passion tost, Thus to disburd'n sought with sad complaint. O miserable of happie! is this the end Of this new glorious World, and mee so late The Glory of that Glory, who now becom Accurst of blessed, hide me from the face Of God, whom to behold was then my highth Of happiness: yet well, if here would end The miserie, I deserv'd it, and would beare My own deservings; but this will not serve; All that I eate or drink, or shall beget, Is propagated curse. O voice once heard Now death to heare! for what can I encrease Or multiplie, but curses on my head? Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling The evil on him brought by me, will curse My Head, Ill fare our Ancestor impure, For this we may thank Adam; but his thanks Shall be the execration; so besides Mine own that bide upon me, all from mee Shall with a fierce reflux on mee redound, On mee as on thir natural center light Heavie, though in thir place. O fleeting joyes Of Paradise, deare bought with lasting woes! Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay To mould me Man, did I sollicite thee From darkness to promote me, or here place In this delicious Garden? as my Will Concurd not to my being, it were but right And equal to reduce me to my dust, Desirous to resigne, and render back All I receav'd, unable to performe Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold The good I sought not. To the loss of that, Sufficient penaltie, why hast thou added The sense of endless woes? inexplicable Thy Justice seems; yet to say truth, too late, I thus contest; then should have been refusd Those terms whatever, when they were propos'd: Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good, Then cavil the conditions? and though God Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son Prove disobedient, and reprov'd, retort, Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not: Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee That proud excuse? yet him not thy election, But Natural necessity begot. God made thee of choice his own, and of his own To serve him, thy reward was of his grace, Thy punishment then justly is at his Will. Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair, That dust I am, and shall to dust returne: O welcom hour whenever! why delayes His hand to execute what his Decree Fixd on this day? why do I overlive, Why am I mockt with death, and length'nd out To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet Mortalitie my sentence, and be Earth Insensible, how glad would lay me down As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse To mee and to my ofspring would torment me With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt Pursues me still, least all I cannot die, Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man Which God inspir'd, cannot together perish With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave, Or in some other dismal place, who knows But I shall die a living Death? O thought Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath Of Life that sinn'd; what dies but what had life And sin? the Bodie properly hath neither. All of me then shall die: let this appease The doubt, since humane reach no further knows. For though the Lord of all be infinite, Is his wrauth also? be it, man is not so, But mortal doom'd. How can he exercise Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end? Can he make deathless Death? that were to make Strange contradiction, which to God himself Impossible is held, as Argument Of weakness, not of Power. Will he, draw out, For angers sake, finite to infinite In punisht man, to satisfie his rigour Satisfi'd never; that were to extend His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law, By which all Causes else according still To the reception of thir matter act, Not to th' extent of thir own Spheare. But say That Death be not one stroak, as I suppos'd, Bereaving sense, but endless miserie From this day onward, which I feel begun Both in me, and without me, and so last To perpetuitie; Ay me, that fear Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution On my defensless head; both Death and I Am found Eternal, and incorporate both, Nor I on my part single, in mee all Posteritie stands curst: Fair Patrimonie That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able To waste it all my self, and leave ye none! So disinherited how would ye bless Me now your Curse! Ah, why should all mankind For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemn'd, If guiltless? But from mee what can proceed, But all corrupt, both Mind and Will deprav'd, Not to do onely, but to will the same With me? how can they acquitted stand In sight of God? Him after all Disputes Forc't I absolve: all my evasions vain And reasonings, though through Mazes, lead me still But to my own conviction: first and last On mee, mee onely, as the sourse and spring Of all corruption, all the blame lights due; So might the wrauth, Fond wish! couldst thou support That burden heavier then the Earth to bear, Then all the world much heavier, though divided With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desir'st, And what thou fearst, alike destroyes all hope Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable Beyond all past example and future, To Satan onely like both crime and doom. O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears And horrors hast thou driv'n me; out of which I find no way, from deep to deeper plung'd! Thus Adam to himself lamented loud Through the still Night, now now, as ere man fell, Wholsom and cool, and mild, but with black Air Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom, Which to his evil Conscience represented All things with double terror: On the ground Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft Curs'd his Creation, Death as oft accus'd The day of his offence. Why comes not Death, Said hee, with one thrice acceptable stroke To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word, Justice Divine not hast'n to be just? But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries. With other echo farr I taught your Shades To answer, and resound farr other Song. Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld, Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh, Soft words to his fierce passion she assay'd: But her with stern regard he thus repell'd. Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best Befits thee with him leagu'd, thy self as false And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape, Like his, and colour Serpentine may shew Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee Henceforth; least that too heav'nly form, pretended To hellish falshood, snare them. But for thee I had persisted happie, had not thy pride And wandring vanitie, when lest was safe, Rejected my forewarning, and disdain'd Not to be trusted, longing to be seen Though by the Devil himself, him overweening To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting Fool'd and beguil'd, by him thou, I by thee, To trust thee from my side, imagin'd wise, Constant, mature, proof against all assaults, And understood not all was but a shew Rather then solid vertu, all but a Rib Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears, More to the part sinister from me drawn, Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie To my just number found. O why did God, Creator wise, that peopl'd highest Heav'n With Spirits Masculine, create at last This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect Of Nature, and not fill the World at once With Men as Angels without Feminine, Or find some other way to generate Mankind? this mischief had not then befall'n, And more that shall befall, innumerable Disturbances on Earth through Femal snares, And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either He never shall find out fit Mate, but such As some misfortune brings him, or mistake, Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain Through her perverseness, but shall see her gaind By a farr worse, or if she love, withheld By Parents, or his happiest choice too late Shall meet, alreadie linkt and Wedlock-bound To a fell Adversarie, his hate or shame: Which infinite calamitie shall cause To humane life, and houshold peace confound. He added not, and from her turn'd, but Eve Not so repulst, with Tears that ceas'd not flowing, And tresses all disorderd, at his feet Fell humble, and imbracing them, besaught His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint. Forsake me not thus, Adam, witness Heav'n What love sincere, and reverence in my heart I beare thee, and unweeting have offended, Unhappilie deceav'd; thy suppliant I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not, Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid, Thy counsel in this uttermost distress, My onely strength and stay: forlorn of thee, Whither shall I betake me, where subsist? While yet we live, scarse one short hour perhaps, Between us two let there be peace, both joyning, As joyn'd in injuries, one enmitie Against a Foe by doom express assign'd us, That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not Thy hatred for this miserie befall'n, On me already lost, mee then thy self More miserable; both have sin'd, but thou Against God onely, I against God and thee, And to the place of judgement will return, There with my cries importune Heaven, that all The sentence from thy head remov'd may light On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe, Mee mee onely just object of his ire. She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight, Immoveable till peace obtain'd from fault Acknowledg'd and deplor'd, in Adam wraught Commiseration; soon his heart relented Towards her, his life so late and sole delight, Now at his feet submissive in distress, Creature so faire his reconcilement seeking, His counsel whom she had displeas'd, his aide; As one disarm'd, his anger all he lost, And thus with peaceful words uprais'd her soon. Unwarie, and too desirous, as before, So now of what thou knowst not, who desir'st The punishment all on thy self; alas, Beare thine own first, ill able to sustaine His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part, And my displeasure bearst so ill. If Prayers Could alter high Decrees, I to that place Would speed before thee, and be louder heard, That on my head all might be visited, Thy frailtie and infirmer Sex forgiv'n, To me committed and by me expos'd. But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame Each other, blam'd enough elsewhere, but strive In offices of Love, how we may light'n Each others burden in our share of woe; Since this days Death denounc't, if ought I see, Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac't evill, A long days dying to augment our paine, And to our Seed O hapless Seed! deriv'd. To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, repli'd. Adam, by sad experiment I know How little weight my words with thee can finde, Found so erroneous, thence by just event Found so unfortunate; nevertheless, Restor'd by thee, vile as I am, to place Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart, Living or dying from thee I will not hide What thoughts in my unquiet brest are ris'n, Tending to som relief of our extremes, Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable, As in our evils, and of easier choice. If care of our descent perplex us most, Which must be born to certain woe, devourd By Death at last, and miserable it is To be to others cause of misery, Our own begotten, and of our Loines to bring Into this cursed World a woful Race, That after wretched Life must be at last Food for so foule a Monster, in thy power It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent The Race unblest, to being yet unbegot. Childless thou art, Childless remaine: So Death shall be deceav'd his glut, and with us two Be forc'd to satisfie his Rav'nous Maw. But if thou judge it hard and difficult, Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain From Loves due Rites, Nuptial embraces sweet, And with desire to languish without hope, Before the present object languishing With like desire, which would be miserie And torment less then none of what we dread, Then both our selves and Seed at once to free From what we fear for both, let us make short, Let us seek Death, or hee not found, supply With our own hands his Office on our selves; Why stand we longer shivering under feares, That shew no end but Death, and have the power, Of many wayes to die the shortest choosing, Destruction with destruction to destroy. She ended heer, or vehement despaire Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts Had entertaind, as di'd her Cheeks with pale. But Adam with such counsel nothing sway'd, To better hopes his more attentive minde Labouring had rais'd, and thus to Eve repli'd. Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems To argue in thee somthing more sublime And excellent then what thy minde contemnes; But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes That excellence thought in thee, and implies, Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret For loss of life and pleasure overlov'd. Or if thou covet death, as utmost end Of miserie, so thinking to evade The penaltie pronounc't, doubt not but God Hath wiselier arm'd his vengeful ire then so To be forestall'd; much more I fear least Death So snatcht will not exempt us from the paine We are by doom to pay; rather such acts Of contumacie will provoke the highest To make death in us live: Then let us seek Som safer resolution, which methinks I have in view, calling to minde with heed Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe Satan, who in the Serpent hath contriv'd Against us this deceit: to crush his head Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost By death brought on our selves, or childless days Resolv'd, as thou proposest; so our Foe Shall scape his punishment ordain'd, and wee Instead shall double ours upon our heads. No more be mention'd then of violence Against our selves, and wilful barrenness, That cuts us off from hope, and savours onely Rancor and pride, impatience and despite, Reluctance against God and his just yoke Laid on our Necks. Remember with what mild And gracious temper he both heard and judg'd Without wrauth or reviling; wee expected Immediate dissolution, which we thought Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee Pains onely in Child-bearing were foretold, And bringing forth, soon recompenc't with joy, Fruit of thy Womb: On mee the Curse aslope Glanc'd on the ground, with labour I must earne My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse; My labour will sustain me; and least Cold Or Heat should injure us, his timely care Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands Cloath'd us unworthie, pitying while he judg'd; How much more, if we pray him, will his ear Be open, and his heart to pitie incline, And teach us further by what means to shun Th' inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow, Which now the Skie with various Face begins To shew us in this Mountain, while the Winds Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek Som better shroud, som better warmth to cherish Our Limbs benumm'd, ere this diurnal Starr Leave cold the Night, how we his gather'd beams Reflected, may with matter sere foment, Or by collision of two bodies grinde The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds Justling or pusht with Winds rude in thir shock Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driv'n down Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine, And sends a comfortable heat from farr, Which might supplie the Sun: such Fire to use, And what may else be remedie or cure To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought, Hee will instruct us praying, and of Grace Beseeching him, so as we need not fear To pass commodiously this life, sustain'd By him with many comforts, till we end In dust, our final rest and native home. What better can we do, then to the place Repairing where he judg'd us, prostrate fall Before him reverent, and there confess Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears Watering the ground, and with our sighs the Air Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Undoubtedly he will relent and turn From his displeasure; in whose look serene, When angry most he seem'd and most severe, What else but favor, grace, and mercie shon? So spake our Father penitent, nor Eve Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place Repairing where he judg'd them prostrate fell Before him reverent, and both confess'd Humbly thir faults, and pardon beg'd, with tears Watering the ground, and with thir sighs the Air Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Thus they in lowliest plight repentant stood Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above Prevenient Grace descending had remov'd The stonie from thir hearts, and made new flesh Regenerat grow instead, that sighs now breath'd Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer Inspir'd, and wing'd for Heav'n with speedier flight Then loudest Oratorie: yet thir port Not of mean suiters, nor important less Seem'd thir Petition, then when th' ancient Pair In Fables old, less ancient yet then these, Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha to restore The Race of Mankind drownd, before the Shrine Of Themis stood devout. To Heav'n thir prayers Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious windes Blow'n vagabond or frustrate: in they passd Dimentionless through Heav'nly dores; then clad With incense, where the Golden Altar fum'd, By thir great Intercessor, came in sight Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son Presenting, thus to intercede began. See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixt With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring, Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those Which his own hand manuring all the Trees Of Paradise could have produc't, ere fall'n From innocence. Now therefore bend thine eare To supplication, heare his sighs though mute; Unskilful with what words to pray, let mee Interpret for him, mee his Advocate And propitiation, all his works on mee Good or not good ingraft, my Merit those Shall perfet, and for these my Death shall pay. Accept me, and in mee from these receave The smell of peace toward Mankinde, let him live Before thee reconcil'd, at least his days Numberd, though sad, till Death, his doom which I To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse To better life shall yeeld him, where with mee All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliss, Made one with me as I with thee am one. To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene. All thy request for Man, accepted Son, Obtain, all thy request was my Decree: But longer in that Paradise to dwell, The Law I gave to Nature him forbids: Those pure immortal Elements that know No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foule, Eject him tainted now, and purge him off As a distemper, gross to aire as gross, And mortal food, as may dispose him best For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first Distemperd all things, and of incorrupt Corrupted. I at first with two fair gifts Created him endowd, with Happiness And Immortalitie: that fondly lost, This other serv'd but to eternize woe; Till I provided Death; so Death becomes His final remedie, and after Life Tri'd in sharp tribulation, and refin'd By Faith and faithful works, to second Life, Wak't in the renovation of the just, Resignes him up with Heav'n and Earth renewd. But let us call to Synod all the Blest Through Heav'ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed, As how with peccant Angels late they saw; And in thir state, though firm, stood more confirmd. He ended, and the Son gave signal high To the bright Minister that watchd, hee blew His Trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps When God descended, and perhaps once more To sound at general Doom. Th' Angelic blast Filld all the Regions: from thir blissful Bowrs By the waters of Life, where ere they sate In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light Hasted, resorting to the Summons high, And took thir Seats; till from his Throne supream Th' Almighty thus pronounced his sovran Will. O Sons, like one of us Man is become To know both Good and Evil, since his taste Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got, Happier, had it suffic'd him to have known Good by it self, and Evil not at all. He sorrows now, repents, and prayes contrite, My motions in him, longer then they move, His heart I know, how variable and vain Self-left. Least therefore his now bolder hand Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat, And live for ever, dream at least to live Forever, to remove him I decree, And send him from the Garden forth to Till The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soile. Michael, this my behest have thou in charge, Take to thee from among the Cherubim Thy choice of flaming Warriours, least the Fiend Or in behalf of Man, or to invade Vacant possession som new trouble raise: Hast thee, and from the Paradise of God Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair, From hallowd ground th' unholie, and denounce To them and to thir Progenie from thence Perpetual banishment. Yet least they faint At the sad Sentence rigorously urg'd, For I behold them soft'nd and with tears Bewailing thir excess, all terror hide. If patiently thy bidding they obey, Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveale To Adam what shall come in future dayes, As I shall thee enlighten, intermix My Cov'nant in the Womans seed renewd; So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace: And on the East side of the Garden place, Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbes, Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame Wide waving, all approach farr off to fright, And guard all passage to the Tree of Life: Least Paradise a receptacle prove To Spirits foule, and all my Trees thir prey, With whose stol'n Fruit Man once more to delude. He ceas'd; and th' Archangelic Power prepar'd For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each Had, like a double Janus, all thir shape Spangl'd with eyes more numerous then those Of Argus, and more wakeful then to drouze, Charm'd with Arcadian Pipe, the Pastoral Reed Of Hermes, or his opiate Rod. Meanwhile To resalute the World with sacred Light Leucothea wak'd, and with fresh dews imbalmd The Earth, when Adam and first Matron Eve Had ended now thir Orisons, and found, Strength added from above, new hope to spring Out of despaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt; Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewd. Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all The good which we enjoy, from Heav'n descends But that from us ought should ascend to Heav'n So prevalent as to concerne the mind Of God high blest, or to incline his will, Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer, Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne Ev'n to the Seat of God. For since I saught By Prayer th' offended Deitie to appease, Kneel'd and before him humbl'd all my heart, Methought I saw him placable and mild, Bending his eare; perswasion in me grew That I was heard with favour; peace returnd Home to my brest, and to my memorie His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe; Which then not minded in dismay, yet now Assures me that the bitterness of death Is past, and we shall live. Whence Haile to thee, Eve rightly call'd, Mother of all Mankind, Mother of all things living, since by thee Man is to live, and all things live for Man. To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek. Ill worthie I such title should belong To me transgressour, who for thee ordaind A help, became thy snare; to mee reproach Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise: But infinite in pardon was my Judge, That I who first brought Death on all, am grac't The sourse of life; next favourable thou, Who highly thus to entitle me voutsaf't, Farr other name deserving. But the Field To labour calls us now with sweat impos'd, Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn, All unconcern'd with our unrest, begins Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth, I never from thy side henceforth to stray, Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell, What can be toilsom in these pleasant Walkes? Here let us live, though in fall'n state, content. So spake, so wish'd much-humbl'd Eve, but Fate Subscrib'd not; Nature first gave Signs, imprest On Bird, Beast, Aire, Aire suddenly eclips'd After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight The Bird of Jove, stoopt from his aerie tour, Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove: Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods, First Hunter then, pursu'd a gentle brace, Direct to th' Eastern Gate was bent thir flight. Adam observ'd, and with his Eye the chase Pursuing, not unmov'd to Eve thus spake. O Eve, some furder change awaits us nigh, Which Heav'n by these mute signs in Nature shews Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn Us haply too secure of our discharge From penaltie, because from death releast Some days; how long, and what till then our life, Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust, And thither must return and be no more. Why else this double object in our sight Of flight pursu'd in th' Air and ore the ground One way the self-same hour? why in the East Darkness ere Dayes mid-course, and Morning light More orient in yon Western Cloud that draws O're the blew Firmament a radiant white, And slow descends, with somthing heav'nly fraught. He err'd not, for by this the heav'nly Bands Down from a Skie of Jasper lighted now In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt, A glorious Apparition, had not doubt And carnal fear that day dimm'd Adams eye. Not that more glorious, when the Angels met Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw The field Pavilion'd with his Guardians bright; Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeerd In Dothan, cover'd with a Camp of Fire, Against the Syrian King, who to surprize One man, Assassin-like had levied Warr, Warr unproclam'd. The Princely Hierarch In thir bright stand, there left his Powers to seise Possession of the Garden; hee alone, To finde where Adam shelterd, took his way, Not unperceav'd of Adam, who to Eve, While the great Visitant approachd, thus spake. Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps Of us will soon determin, or impose New Laws to be observ'd; for I descrie From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill One of the heav'nly Host, and by his Gate None of the meanest, some great Potentate Or of the Thrones above, such Majestie Invests him coming; yet not terrible, That I should fear, nor sociably mild, As Raphael, that I should much confide, But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend, With reverence I must meet, and thou retire. He ended; and th' Arch-Angel soon drew nigh, Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Armes A militarie Vest of purple flowd Livelier then Meliboean, or the graine Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Hero's old In time of Truce; Iris had dipt the wooff; His starrie Helme unbuckl'd shew'd him prime In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side As in a glistering Zodiac hung the Sword, Satans dire dread, and in his hand the Spear. Adam bowd low, hee Kingly from his State Inclin'd not, but his coming thus declar'd. Adam, Heav'ns high behest no Preface needs: Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death, Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress, Defeated of his seisure many dayes Giv'n thee of Grace, wherein thou may'st repent, And one bad act with many deeds well done Mayst cover: well may then thy Lord appeas'd Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claimes; But longer in this Paradise to dwell Permits not; to remove thee I am come, And send thee from the Garden forth to till The ground whence thou wast tak'n, fitter Soile. He added not, for Adam at the newes Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood, That all his senses bound; Eve, who unseen Yet all had heard, with audible lament Discover'd soon the place of her retire. O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death! Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave Thee Native Soile, these happie Walks and Shades, Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend, Quiet though sad, the respit of that day That must be mortal to us both. O flours, That never will in other Climate grow, My early visitation, and my last At Eev'n, which I bred up with tender hand From the first op'ning bud, and gave ye Names, Who now shall reare ye to the Sun, or ranke Your Tribes, and water from th' ambrosial Fount? Thee lastly nuptial Bowre, by mee adornd With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee How shall I part, and whither wander down Into a lower World, to this obscure And wilde, how shall we breath in other Aire Less pure, accustomd to immortal Fruits? Whom thus the Angel interrupted milde. Lament not Eve, but patiently resigne What justly thou hast lost; nor set thy heart, Thus over fond, on that which is not thine; Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound; Where he abides, think there thy native soile. Adam by this from the cold sudden damp Recovering, and his scatterd spirits returnd, To Michael thus his humble words addressd. Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or nam'd Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem Prince above Princes, gently hast thou tould Thy message, which might else in telling wound, And in performing end us; what besides Of sorrow and dejection and despair Our frailtie can sustain, thy tidings bring, Departure from this happy place, our sweet Recess, and onely consolation left Familiar to our eyes, all places else Inhospitable appeer and desolate, Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer Incessant I could hope to change the will Of him who all things can, I would not cease To wearie him with my assiduous cries: But prayer against his absolute Decree No more availes then breath against the winde, Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth: Therefore to his great bidding I submit. This most afflicts me, that departing hence, As from his face I shall be hid, deprivd His blessed count'nance; here I could frequent, With worship, place by place where he voutsaf'd Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate; On this Mount he appeerd, under this Tree Stood visible, among these Pines his voice I heard, here with him at this Fountain talk'd: So many grateful Altars I would reare Of grassie Terfe, and pile up every Stone Of lustre from the brook, in memorie, Or monument to Ages, and thereon Offer sweet smelling Gumms & Fruits and Flours: In yonder nether World where shall I seek His bright appearances, or footstep trace? For though I fled him angrie, yet recall'd To life prolongd and promisd Race, I now Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts Of glory, and farr off his steps adore. To whom thus Michael with regard benigne. Adam, thou know'st Heav'n his, and all the Earth Not this Rock onely; his Omnipresence fills Land, Sea, and Aire, and every kinde that lives, Fomented by his virtual power and warmd: All th' Earth he gave thee to possess and rule, No despicable gift; surmise not then His presence to these narrow bounds confin'd Of Paradise or Eden: this had been Perhaps thy Capital Seate, from whence had spred All generations, and had hither come From all the ends of th' Earth, to celebrate And reverence thee thir great Progenitor. But this praeeminence thou hast lost, brought down To dwell on eeven ground now with thy Sons: Yet doubt not but in Vallie and in Plaine God is as here, and will be found alike Present, and of his presence many a signe Still following thee, still compassing thee round With goodness and paternal Love, his Face Express, and of his steps the track Divine. Which that thou mayst beleeve, and be confirmd, Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent To shew thee what shall come in future dayes To thee and to thy Ofspring; good with bad Expect to hear, supernal Grace contending With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn True patience, and to temper joy with fear And pious sorrow, equally enur'd By moderation either state to beare, Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead Safest thy life, and best prepar'd endure Thy mortal passage when it comes. Ascend This Hill; let Eve for I have drencht her eyes Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak'st, As once thou slepst, while Shee to life was formd. To whom thus Adam gratefully repli'd. Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path Thou lead'st me, and to the hand of Heav'n submit, However chast'ning, to the evil turne My obvious breast, arming to overcom By suffering, and earne rest from labour won, If so I may attain. So both ascend Of Paradise the highest, from whose top The Hemisphere of Earth in cleerest Ken Stretcht out to amplest reach of prospect lay. Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round, Whereon for different cause the Tempter set Our second Adam in the Wilderness, To shew him all Earths Kingdomes and thir Glory. His Eye might there command wherever stood City of old or modern Fame, the Seat Of mightiest Empire, from the destind Walls Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can To Paquin of Sinaean Kings, and thence To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul Down to the golden Chersonese, or where The Persian in Ecbatan sate, or since In Hispahan, or where the Russian Ksar Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken Th' Empire of Negus to his utmost Port Ercoco and the less Maritine Kings And Sofala thought Ophir, to the Realme Of Congo, and Angola fardest South; Or thence from Niger Flood to Atlas Mount On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway The World: in Spirit perhaps he also saw Rich Mexico the seat of Motezume, And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat Of Atabalipa, and yet unspoil'd Guiana, whose great Citie Geryons Sons Call El Dorado: but to nobler sights Michael from Adams eyes the Filme remov'd Which that false Fruit that promis'd clearer sight Had bred; then purg'd with Euphrasie and Rue The visual Nerve, for he had much to see; And from the Well of Life three drops instill'd. So deep the power of these Ingredients pierc'd, Eevn to the inmost seat of mental sight, That Adam now enforc't to close his eyes, Sunk down and all his Spirits became intranst: But him the gentle Angel by the hand Soon rais'd, and his attention thus recall'd. Adam, now ope thine eyes, and first behold Th' effects which thy original crime hath wrought In some to spring from thee, who never touch'd Th' excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conspir'd, Nor sinn'd thy sin, yet from that sin derive Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds. His eyes he op'nd, and beheld a field, Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves New reapt, the other part sheep-walks and foulds; Ith' midst an Altar as the Land-mark stood Rustic, of grassie sord; thither anon A sweatie Reaper from his Tillage brought First Fruits, the green Eare, and the yellow Sheaf, Uncull'd, as came to hand; a Shepherd next More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid The Inwards and thir Fat, with Incense strew'd, On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites perform'd. His Offring soon propitious Fire from Heav'n Consum'd with nimble glance, and grateful steame; The others not, for his was not sincere; Whereat hee inlie rag'd, and as they talk'd, Smote him into the Midriff with a stone That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale Groand out his Soul with gushing bloud effus'd. Much at that sight was Adam in his heart Dismai'd, and thus in haste to th' Angel cri'd. O Teacher, some great mischief hath befall'n To that meek man, who well had sacrific'd; Is Pietie thus and pure Devotion paid? T' whom Michael thus, hee also mov'd, repli'd. These two are Brethren, Adam, and to come Out of thy loyns; th' unjust the just hath slain, For envie that his Brothers Offering found From Heav'n acceptance; but the bloodie Fact Will be aveng'd, and th' others Faith approv'd Loose no reward, though here thou see him die, Rowling in dust and gore. To which our Sire. Alas, both for the deed and for the cause! But have I now seen Death? Is this the way I must return to native dust? O sight Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold, Horrid to think, how horrible to feel! To whom thus Michael. Death thou hast seen In his first shape on man; but many shapes Of Death, and many are the wayes that lead To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense More terrible at th' entrance then within. Some, as thou saw'st, by violent stroke shall die, By Fire, Flood, Famin, by Intemperance more In Meats and Drinks, which on the Earth shal bring Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew Before thee shall appear; that thou mayst know What miserie th' inabstinence of Eve Shall bring on men. Immediately a place Before his eyes appeard, sad, noysom, dark, A Lazar-house it seemd, wherein were laid Numbers of all diseas'd, all maladies Of gastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualmes Of heart-sick Agonie, all feavorous kinds, Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs, Intestin Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs, Dropsies, and Asthma's, and Joint-racking Rheums. Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch; And over them triumphant Death his Dart Shook, but delaid to strike, though oft invok't With vows, as thir chief good, and final hope. Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long Drie-ey'd behold? Adam could not, but wept, Though not of Woman born; compassion quell'd His best of Man, and gave him up to tears A space, till firmer thoughts restraind excess, And scarce recovering words his plaint renew'd. O miserable Mankind, to what fall Degraded, to what wretched state reserv'd? Better end heer unborn. Why is life giv'n To be thus wrested from us? rather why Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew What we receive, would either not accept Life offer'd, or soon beg to lay it down, Glad to be so dismist in peace. Can thus Th' Image of God in man created once So goodly and erect, though faultie since, To such unsightly sufferings be debas't Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man, Retaining still Divine similitude In part, from such deformities be free, And for his Makers Image sake exempt? Thir Makers Image, answerd Michael, then Forsook them, when themselves they villifi'd To serve ungovern'd appetite, and took His Image whom they serv'd, a brutish vice, Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve. Therefore so abject is thir punishment, Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but thir own, Or if his likeness, by themselves defac't While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules To loathsom sickness, worthily, since they Gods Image did not reverence in themselves. I yeild it just, said Adam, and submit. But is there yet no other way, besides These painful passages, how we may come To Death, and mix with our connatural dust? There is, said Michael, if thou well observe The rule of not too much, by temperance taught In what thou eatst and drinkst, seeking from thence Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight, Till many years over thy head return: So maist thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease Gatherd, not harshly pluckt, for death mature: This is old age; but then thou must outlive Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change To witherd weak & gray; thy Senses then Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgoe, To what thou hast, and for the Aire of youth Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reigne A melancholly damp of cold and dry To waigh thy spirits down, and last consume The Balme of Life. To whom our Ancestor. Henceforth I flie not Death, nor would prolong Life much, bent rather how I may be quit Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge, Which I must keep till my appointed day Of rendring up, Michael to him repli'd. Nor love thy Life, nor hate; but what thou livst Live well, how long or short permit to Heav'n: And now prepare thee for another sight. He lookd and saw a spacious Plaine, whereon Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds Of Cattel grazing: others, whence the sound Of Instruments that made melodious chime Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moovd Thir stops and chords was seen: his volant touch Instinct through all proportions low and high Fled and pursu'd transverse the resonant fugue. In other part stood one who at the Forge Labouring, two massie clods of Iron and Brass Had melted whether found where casual fire Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale, Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot To som Caves mouth, or whether washt by stream From underground the liquid Ore he dreind Into fit moulds prepar'd; from which he formd First his own Tooles; then, what might else be wrought Fulfil or grav'n in mettle. After these, But on the hether side a different sort From the high neighbouring Hills, which was thir Seat, Down to the Plain descended: by thir guise Just men they seemd, and all thir study bent To worship God aright, and know his works Not hid, nor those things lost which might preserve Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain Long had not walkt, when from the Tents behold A Beavie of fair Women, richly gay In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on: The Men though grave, ey'd them, and let thir eyes Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net Fast caught, they lik'd, and each his liking chose; And now of love they treat till th' Eevning Star Loves Harbinger appeerd; then all in heat They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invok't; With Feast and Musick all the Tents resound. Such happy interview and fair event Of love & youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours, And charming Symphonies attach'd the heart Of Adam, soon enclin'd to admit delight, The bent of Nature; which he thus express'd. True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest, Much better seems this Vision, and more hope Of peaceful dayes portends, then those two past; Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse, Here Nature seems fulfilld in all her ends. To whom thus Michael. Judg not what is best By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet, Created, as thou art, to nobler end Holie and pure, conformitie divine. Those Tents thou sawst so pleasant, were the Tents Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race Who slew his Brother; studious they appere Of Arts that polish Life, Inventers rare, Unmindful of thir Maker, though his Spirit Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledg'd none. Yet they a beauteous ofspring shall beget; For that fair femal Troop thou sawst, that seemd Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay, Yet empty of all good wherein consists Womans domestic honour and chief praise; Bred onely and completed to the taste Of lustful apperence, to sing, to dance, To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roule the Eye. To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives Religious titl'd them the Sons of God, Shall yeild up all thir vertue, all thir fame Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy, Erelong to swim at larg and laugh; for which The world erelong a world of tears must weepe. To whom thus Adam of short joy bereft. O pittie and shame, that they who to live well Enterd so faire, should turn aside to tread Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint! But still I see the tenor of Mans woe Holds on the same, from Woman to begin. From Mans effeminate slackness it begins, Said th' Angel, who should better hold his place By wisdome, and superiour gifts receavd. But now prepare thee for another Scene. He lookd and saw wide Territorie spred Before him, Towns, and rural works between, Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towrs, Concours in Arms, fierce Faces threatning Warr, Giants of mightie Bone, and bould emprise; Part wield thir Arms, part courb the foaming Steed, Single or in Array of Battel rang'd Both Horse and Foot, nor idely mustring stood; One way a Band select from forage drives A herd of Beeves, faire Oxen and faire Kine From a fat Meddow ground; or fleecy Flock, Ewes and thir bleating Lambs over the Plaine, Thir Bootie; scarce with Life the Shepherds flye, But call in aide, which tacks a bloody Fray; With cruel Tournament the Squadrons joine; Where Cattel pastur'd late, now scatterd lies With Carcasses and Arms th' ensanguind Field Deserted: Others to a Citie strong Lay Siege, encampt; by Batterie, Scale, and Mine, Assaulting; others from the Wall defend With Dart and Jav'lin, Stones and sulfurous Fire; On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds. In other part the scepter'd Haralds call To Council in the Citie Gates: anon Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriours mixt, Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon In factious opposition, till at last Of middle Age one rising, eminent In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong, And Judgement from above: him old and young Exploded, and had seiz'd with violent hands, Had not a Cloud descending snatch'd him thence Unseen amid the throng: so violence Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found. Adam was all in tears, and to his guide Lamenting turnd full sad; O what are these, Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death Inhumanly to men, and multiply Ten thousand fould the sin of him who slew His Brother; for of whom such massacher Make they but of thir Brethren, men of men? But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heav'n Rescu'd, had in his Righteousness bin lost? To whom thus Michael; These are the product Of those ill-mated Marriages thou saw'st; Where good with bad were matcht, who of themselves Abhor to joyn; and by imprudence mixt, Produce prodigious Births of bodie or mind. Such were these Giants, men of high renown; For in those dayes Might onely shall be admir'd, And Valour and Heroic Vertu call'd; To overcome in Battel, and subdue Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch Of human Glorie, and for Glorie done Of triumph, to be styl'd great Conquerours, Destroyers rightlier call'd and Plagues of men. Thus Fame shall be achiev'd, renown on Earth, And what most merits fame in silence hid. But hee the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst The onely righteous in a World perverse, And therefore hated, therefore so beset With Foes for daring single to be just, And utter odious Truth, that God would come To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High Rapt in a balmie Cloud with winged Steeds Did, as thou sawst, receave, to walk with God High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss, Exempt from Death; to shew thee what reward Awaits the good, the rest what punishment; Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold. He look'd, & saw the face of things quite chang'd; The brazen Throat of Warr had ceast to roar, All now was turn'd to jollitie and game, To luxurie and riot, feast and dance, Marrying or prostituting, as befell, Rape or Adulterie, where passing faire Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broiles. At length a Reverend Sire among them came, And of thir doings great dislike declar'd, And testifi'd against thir wayes; hee oft Frequented thir Assemblies, whereso met, Triumphs or Festivals, and to them preachd In prison under Judgements imminent: But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceas'd Contending, and remov'd his Tents farr off; Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall, Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk, Measur'd by Cubit, length, & breadth, and highth, Smeard round with Pitch, and in the side a dore Contriv'd, and of provisions laid in large For Man and Beast: when loe a wonder strange! Of everie Beast, and Bird, and Insect small Came seavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught Thir order; last the Sire, and his three Sons With thir four Wives, and God made fast the dore. Meanwhile the Southwind rose, & with black wings Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove From under Heav'n; the Hills to their supplie Vapour, and Exhalation dusk and moist, Sent up amain; and now the thick'nd Skie Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rush'd the Rain Impetuous, and continu'd till the Earth No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow Rode tilting o're the Waves, all dwellings else Flood overwhelmd, and them with all thir pomp Deep under water rould; Sea cover'd Sea, Sea without shoar; and in thir Palaces Where luxurie late reign'd, Sea-monsters whelp'd And stabl'd; of Mankind, so numerous late, All left, in one small bottom swum imbark't. How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold The end of all thy Ofspring, end so sad, Depopulation; thee another Floud, Of tears and sorrow a Floud thee also drown'd, And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reard By th' Angel, on thy feet thou stoodst at last, Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns His Childern, all in view destroyd at once; And scarce to th' Angel utterdst thus thy plaint. O Visions ill foreseen! better had I Liv'd ignorant of future, so had borne My part of evil onely, each dayes lot Anough to bear; those now, that were dispenst The burd'n of many Ages, on me light At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth Abortive, to torment me ere thir being, With thought that they must be. Let no man seek Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall Him or his Childern, evil he may be sure, Which neither his foreknowing can prevent, And hee the future evil shall no less In apprehension then in substance feel Grievous to bear: but that care now is past, Man is not whom to warne: those few escap't Famin and anguish will at last consume Wandring that watrie Desert: I had hope When violence was ceas't, and Warr on Earth, All would have then gon well, peace would have crownd With length of happy days the race of man; But I was farr deceav'd; for now I see Peace to corrupt no less then Warr to waste. How comes it thus? unfould, Celestial Guide, And whether here the Race of man will end. To whom thus Michael. Those whom last thou sawst In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they First seen in acts of prowess eminent And great exploits, but of true vertu void; Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste Subduing Nations, and achievd thereby Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey, Shall change thir course to pleasure, ease, and sloth, Surfet, and lust, till wantonness and pride Raise out of friendship hostil deeds in Peace. The conquerd also, and enslav'd by Warr Shall with thir freedom lost all vertu loose And feare of God, from whom thir pietie feign'd In sharp contest of Battel found no aide Against invaders; therefore coold in zeale Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure, Worldlie or dissolute, on what thir Lords Shall leave them to enjoy; for th' Earth shall bear More then anough, that temperance may be tri'd: So all shall turn degenerate, all deprav'd, Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot; One Man except, the onely Son of light In a dark Age, against example good, Against allurement, custom, and a World Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn, Or violence, hee of thir wicked wayes Shall them admonish, and before them set The paths of righteousness, how much more safe, And full of peace, denouncing wrauth to come On thir impenitence; and shall returne Of them derided, but of God observd The one just Man alive; by his command Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou beheldst, To save himself and houshold from amidst A World devote to universal rack. No sooner hee with them of Man and Beast Select for life shall in the Ark be lodg'd, And shelterd round, but all the Cataracts Of Heav'n set open on the Earth shall powre Raine day and night, all fountaines of the Deep Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount Of Paradise by might of Waves be moovd Out of his place, pushd by the horned floud, With all his verdure spoil'd, and Trees adrift Down the great River to the op'ning Gulf, And there take root an Iland salt and bare, The haunt of Seales and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang. To teach thee that God attributes to place No sanctitie, if none be thither brought By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell. And now what further shall ensue, behold. He lookd, and saw the Ark hull on the floud, Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled, Drivn by a keen North-winde, that blowing drie Wrinkl'd the face of Deluge, as decai'd; And the cleer Sun on his wide watrie Glass Gaz'd hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew, As after thirst, which made thir flowing shrink From standing lake to tripping ebbe, that stole With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopt His Sluces, as the Heav'n his windows shut. The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground Fast on the top of som high mountain fixt. And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appeer; With clamor thence the rapid Currents drive Towards the retreating Sea thir furious tyde. Forthwith from out the Arke a Raven flies, And after him, the surer messenger, A Dove sent forth once and agen to spie Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light; The second time returning, in his Bill An Olive leafe he brings, pacific signe: Anon drie ground appeers, and from his Arke The ancient Sire descends with all his Train; Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout, Grateful to Heav'n, over his head beholds A dewie Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay, Betok'ning peace from God, and Cov'nant new. Whereat the heart of Adam erst so sad Greatly rejoyc'd, and thus his joy broke forth. O thou that future things canst represent As present, Heav'nly instructer, I revive At this last sight, assur'd that Man shall live With all the Creatures, and thir seed preserve. Farr less I now lament for one whole World Of wicked Sons destroyd, then I rejoyce For one Man found so perfet and so just, That God voutsafes to raise another World From him, and all his anger to forget. But say, what mean those colourd streaks in Heavn, Distended as the Brow of God appeas'd, Or serve they as a flourie verge to binde The fluid skirts of that same watrie Cloud, Least it again dissolve and showr the Earth? To whom th' Archangel. Dextrously thou aim'st; So willingly doth God remit his Ire, Though late repenting him of Man deprav'd, Griev'd at his heart, when looking down he saw The whole Earth fill'd with violence, and all flesh Corrupting each thir way; yet those remoov'd, Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight, That he relents, not to blot out mankind, And makes a Covenant never to destroy The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set His triple-colour'd Bow, whereon to look And call to mind his Cov'nant: Day and Night, Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost Shall hold thir course, till fire purge all things new, Both Heav'n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell. Daemoniac Phrenzie, moaping Melancholie And Moon struck madness, pining Atrophie, Marasmus, and wide wasting Pestilence, My dissolution. Michael repli'd . Though bent on speed, so heer the Archangel' paus'd Betwixt the world destroy'd and world restor'd, If Adam aught perhaps might interpose; Then with transition sweet new Speech resumes Thus thou hast seen one World begin and end; And Man as from a second stock proceed. Much thou hast yet to see, but I perceave Thy mortal sight to faile; objects divine Must needs impaire and wearie human sense: Henceforth what is to com I will relate, Thou therefore give due audience, and attend. This second sours of Men, while yet but few, And while the dread of judgement past remains Fresh in thir mindes, fearing the Deitie, With some regard to what is just and right Shall lead thir lives, and multiplie apace, Labouring the soile, and reaping plenteous crop, Corn wine and oyle; and from the herd or flock, Oft sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid, With large Wine-offerings pour'd, and sacred Feast Shal spend thir dayes in joy unblam'd, and dwell Long time in peace by Families and Tribes Under paternal rule; till one shall rise Of proud ambitious heart, who not content With fair equalitie, fraternal state, Will arrogate Dominion undeserv'd Over his brethren, and quite dispossess Concord and law of Nature from the Earth; Hunting and Men not Beasts shall be his game With Warr and hostile snare such as refuse Subjection to his Empire tyrannous: A mightie Hunter thence he shall be styl'd Before the Lord, as in despite of Heav'n, Or from Heav'n claming second Sovrantie; And from Rebellion shall derive his name, Though of Rebellion others he accuse. Hee with a crew, whom like Ambition joyns With him or under him to tyrannize, Marching from Eden towards the West, shall finde The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge Boiles out from under ground, the mouth of Hell; Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast to build A Citie & Towre, whose top may reach to Heav'n; And get themselves a name, least far disperst In foraign Lands thir memorie be lost, Regardless whether good or evil fame. But God who oft descends to visit men Unseen, and through thir habitations walks To mark thir doings, them beholding soon, Comes down to see thir Citie, ere the Tower Obstruct Heav'n Towrs, and in derision sets Upon thir Tongues a various Spirit to rase Quite out thir Native Language, and instead To sow a jangling noise of words unknown: Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud Among the Builders; each to other calls Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage, As mockt they storm; great laughter was in Heav'n And looking down, to see the hubbub strange And hear the din; thus was the building left Ridiculous, and the work Confusion nam'd. Whereto thus Adam fatherly displeas'd. O execrable Son so to aspire Above his Brethren, to himself affirming Authoritie usurpt, from God not giv'n: He gave us onely over Beast, Fish, Fowl Dominion absolute; that right we hold By his donation; but Man over men He made not Lord; such title to himself Reserving, human left from human free. But this Usurper his encroachment proud Stayes not on Man; to God his Tower intends Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food Will he convey up thither to sustain Himself and his rash Armie, where thin Aire Above the Clouds will pine his entrails gross, And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread? To whom thus Michael. Justly thou abhorr'st That Son, who on the quiet state of men Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue Rational Libertie; yet know withall, Since thy original lapse, true Libertie Is lost, which alwayes with right Reason dwells Twinn'd, and from her hath no dividual being: Reason in man obscur'd, or not obeyd, Immediately inordinate desires And upstart Passions catch the Government From Reason, and to servitude reduce Man till then free. Therefore since hee permits Within himself unworthie Powers to reign Over free Reason, God in Judgement just Subjects him from without to violent Lords; Who oft as undeservedly enthrall His outward freedom: Tyrannie must be, Though to the Tyrant thereby no excuse. Yet somtimes Nations will decline so low From vertue, which is reason, that no wrong, But Justice, and some fatal curse annext Deprives them of thir outward libertie, Thir inward lost: Witness th' irreverent Son Of him who built the Ark, who for the shame Don to his Father, heard this heavie curse, Servant Of Servants, on his vitious Race. Thus will this latter, as the former World, Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw His presence from among them, and avert His holy Eyes; resolving from thenceforth To leave them to thir own polluted wayes; And one peculiar Nation to select From all the rest, of whom to be invok'd, A Nation from one faithful man to spring: Him on this side Euphrates yet residing, Bred up in Idol-worship; O that men Canst thou believe? should be so stupid grown, While yet the Patriark liv'd, who scap'd the Flood, As to forsake the living God, and fall To-worship thir own work in Wood and Stone For Gods! yet him God the most High voutsafes To call by Vision from his Fathers house, His kindred and false Gods, into a Land Which he will shew him, and from him will raise A mightie Nation, and upon him showre His benediction so, that in his Seed All Nations shall be blest; hee straight obeys, Not knowing to what Land, yet firm believes: I see him, but thou canst not, with what Faith He leaves his Gods, his Friends, and native Soile Ur of Chaldaea, passing now the Ford To Haran, after him a cumbrous Train Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous servitude; Not wandring poor, but trusting all his wealth With God, who call'd him, in a land unknown. Canaan he now attains, I see his Tents Pitcht about Sechem, and the neighbouring Plaine Of Moreb; there by promise he receaves Gift to his Progenie of all that Land; Things by thir names I call, though yet unnam'd From Hermon East to the great Western Sea, Mount Hermon, yonder Sea, each place behold In prospect, as I point them; on the shoare Mount Carmel; here the double-founted stream Jordan, true limit Eastward; but his Sons Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of Hills. This ponder, that all Nations of the Earth Shall in his Seed be blessed; by that Seed Is meant thy great deliverer, who shall bruise The Serpents head; whereof to thee anon Plainlier shall be reveald. This Patriarch blest, Whom Faithful Abraham due time shall call, A Son, and of his Son a Grand-childe leaves, Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown; The Grandchilde with twelve Sons increast, departs From Canaan, to a Land hereafter call'd See where it flows, disgorging at seaven mouthes Into the Sea: to sojourn in that Land He comes invited by a yonger Son In time of dearth, a Son whose worthy deeds Raise him to be the second in that Realme Of Pharao: there he dies, and leaves his Race Growing into a Nation, and now grown Suspected to a sequent King, who seeks To stop thir overgrowth, as inmate guests Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves Inhospitably, and kills thir infant Males: Till by two brethren those two brethren call Moses and Aaron sent from God to claime His people from enthralment, they return With glory and spoile back to thir promis'd Land. But first the lawless Tyrant, who denies To know thir God, or message to regard, Must be compelld by Signes and Judgements dire; To blood unshed the Rivers must be turnd, Frogs, Lice and Flies must all his Palace fill With loath'd intrusion, and fill all the land; His Cattel must of Rot and Murren die, Botches and blaines must all his flesh imboss, And all his people; Thunder mixt with Haile, And wheel on th' Earth, devouring where it rouls; What it devours not, Herb, or Fruit, or Graine, A darksom Cloud of Locusts swarming down Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green: Darkness must overshadow all his bounds, Palpable darkness, and blot out three dayes; Last with one midnight stroke all the first-born This River-dragon tam'd at length submits To let his sojourners depart, and oft Humbles his stubborn heart, but still as Ice More hard'nd after thaw, till in his rage Pursuing whom he late dismissd, the Sea Swallows him with his Host, but them lets pass As on drie land between two christal walls, Aw'd by the rod of Moses so to stand Divided, till his rescu'd gain thir shoar: Such wondrous power God to his Saint will lend, Though present in his Angel, who shall goe Before them in a Cloud, and Pillar of Fire, To guide them in thir journey, and remove Behinde them, while th' obdurat King pursues: All night he will pursue, but his approach Darkness defends between till morning Watch; Then through the Firey Pillar and the Cloud God looking forth will trouble all his Host And craze thir Chariot wheels: when by command Moses once more his potent Rod extends Over the Sea; the Sea his Rod obeys; On thir imbattelld ranks the Waves return, And overwhelm thir Warr: the Race elect Safe towards Canaan from the shoar advance Through the wilde Desert, not the readiest way, Least entring on the Canaanite allarmd Warr terrifie them inexpert, and feare Inglorious life with servitude; for life To noble and ignoble is more sweet Untraind in Armes, where rashness leads not on. This also shall they gain by thir delay In the wide Wilderness, there they shall found Thir government, and thir great Senate choose Through the twelve Tribes, to rule by Laws ordaind: God from the Mount of Sinai, whose gray top Shall tremble, he descending, will himself In Thunder Lightning and loud Trumpets sound Ordaine them Lawes; part such as appertaine To civil Justice, part religious Rites Of sacrifice, informing them, by types And shadowes, of that destind Seed to bruise The Serpent, by what meanes he shall achieve Mankinds deliverance. But the voice of God To mortal eare is dreadful; they beseech That Moses might report to them his will, And terror cease; he grants them thir desire, Instructed that to God is no access Without Mediator, whose high Office now Moses in figure beares, to introduce One greater, of whose day he shall foretell, And all the Prophets in thir Age the times Of great Messiah shall sing. Thus Laws and Rites Establisht, such delight hath God in Men Obedient to his will, that he voutsafes Among them to set up his Tabernacle, The holy One with mortal Men to dwell: By his prescript a Sanctuary is fram'd Of Cedar, overlaid with Gold, therein The Records of his Cov'nant, over these A Mercie-seat of Gold between the wings Of two bright Cherubim, before him burn Seaven Lamps as in a Zodiac representing The Heav'nly fires; over the Tent a Cloud Shall rest by Day, a fierie gleame by Night, Save when they journie, and at length they come, Promisd to Abraham and his Seed: the rest Were long to tell, how many Battels fought, How many Kings destroyd, and Kingdoms won, Or how the Sun shall in mid Heav'n stand still A day entire, and Nights due course adjourne, Mans voice commanding, Sun in Gibeon stand, And thou Moon in the vale of Aialon, Till Israel overcome; so call the third From Abraham, Son of Isaac, and from him His whole descent, who thus shall Canaan win. Here Adam interpos'd. O sent from Heav'n, Enlightner of my darkness, gracious things Thou hast reveald, those chiefly which concerne Just Abraham and his Seed: now first I finde Mine eyes true op'ning, and my heart much eas'd, Erwhile perplext with thoughts what would becom His day, in whom all Nations shall be blest, Favour unmerited by me, who sought Forbidd'n knowledge by forbidd'n means. This yet I apprehend not, why to those Among whom God will deigne to dwell on Earth So many and so various Laws are giv'n; So many Laws argue so many sins Among them; how can God with such reside? To whom thus Michael. Doubt not but that sin Will reign among them, as of thee begot; And therefore was Law given them to evince Thir natural pravitie, by stirring up Sin against Law to fight; that when they see Law can discover sin, but not remove, Save by those shadowie expiations weak, The bloud of Bulls and Goats, they may conclude Some bloud more precious must be paid for Man, Just for unjust, that in such righteousness To them by Faith imputed, they may finde Justification towards God, and peace Of Conscience, which the Law by Ceremonies Cannot appease, nor Man the moral part Perform, and not performing cannot live. So Law appears imperfet, and but giv'n With purpose to resign them in full time Up to a better Cov'nant, disciplin'd From shadowie Types to Truth, from Flesh to Spirit, From imposition of strict Laws, to free Acceptance of large Grace, from servil fear To filial, works of Law to works of Faith. And therefore shall not Moses, though of God Highly belov'd, being but the Minister Of Law, his people into Canaan lead; But Joshua whom the Gentiles Jesus call, His Name and Office bearing, who shall quell The adversarie Serpent, and bring back Through the worlds wilderness long wanderd man Safe to eternal Paradise of rest. Meanwhile they in thir earthly Canaan plac't Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins National interrupt thir public peace, Provoking God to raise them enemies: From whom as oft he saves them penitent By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom The second, both for pietie renownd And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive Irrevocable, that his Regal Throne For ever shall endure; the like shall sing Of David so I name this King shall rise A Son, the Womans Seed to thee foretold, Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust All Nations, and to Kings foretold, of Kings The last, for of his Reign shall be no end. But first a long succession must ensue, And his next Son for Wealth and Wisdom fam'd, The clouded Ark of God till then in Tents Wandring, shall in a glorious Temple enshrine. Such follow him, as shall be registerd Part good, part bad, of bad the longer scrowle, Whose foul Idolatries, and other faults Heapt to the popular summe, will so incense God, as to leave them, and expose thir Land, Thir Citie, his Temple, and his holy Ark With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey To that proud Citie, whose high Walls thou saw'st Left in confusion, Babylon thence call'd. There in captivitie he lets them dwell The space of seventie years, then brings them back, Remembring mercie, and his Cov'nant sworn To David, stablisht as the dayes of Heav'n. Returnd from Babylon by leave of Kings Thir Lords, whom God dispos'd, the house of God They first re-edifie, and for a while In mean estate live moderate, till grown In wealth and multitude, factious they grow; But first among the Priests dissension springs, Men who attend the Altar, and should most Endeavour Peace: thir strife pollution brings Upon the Temple it self: at last they seise The Scepter, and regard not Davids Sons, Then loose it to a stranger, that the true Anointed King Messiah might be born Barr'd of his right; yet at his Birth a Starr Unseen before in Heav'n proclaims him com, And guides the Eastern Sages, who enquire His place, to offer Incense, Myrrh, and Gold; His place of birth a solemn Angel tells To simple Shepherds, keeping watch by night; They gladly thither haste, and by a Quire Of squadrond Angels hear his Carol sung. The Power of the most High; he shall ascend The Throne hereditarie, and bound his Reign With earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heav'ns. He ceas'd, discerning Adam with such joy Surcharg'd, as had like grief bin dew'd in tears, Without the vent of words, which these he breathd. O Prophet of glad tidings, finisher Of utmost hope! now clear I understand What oft my steddiest thoughts have searcht in vain, Why our great expectation should be call'd The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, Haile, High in the love of Heav'n, yet from my Loynes Thou shalt proceed, and from thy Womb the Son Of God most High; So God with man unites. Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise Expect with mortal paine: say where and when Thir fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victors heel. To whom thus Michael. Dream not of thir fight, As of a Duel, or the local wounds Of head or heel: not therefore joynes the Son Manhood to God-head, with more strength to foil Thy enemie; nor so is overcome Satan, whose fall from Heav'n, a deadlier bruise, Disabl'd not to give thee thy deaths wound: Which hee, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure, Not by destroying Satan, but his works In thee and in thy Seed: nor can this be, But by fulfilling that which thou didst want, Obedience to the Law of God, impos'd On penaltie of death, and suffering death, The penaltie to thy transgression due, And due to theirs which out of thine will grow: So onely can high Justice rest appaid. The Law of God exact he shall fulfill Both by obedience and by love, though love Alone fulfill the Law; thy punishment He shall endure by coming in the Flesh To a reproachful life and cursed death, Proclaiming Life to all who shall believe In his redemption, and that his obedience Imputed becomes theirs by Faith, his merits To save them, not thir own, though legal works. For this he shall live hated, be blasphem'd, Seis'd on by force, judg'd, and to death condemnd A shameful and accurst, naild to the Cross By his own Nation, slaine for bringing Life; But to the Cross he nailes thy Enemies, The Law that is against thee, and the sins Of all mankinde, with him there crucifi'd, Never to hurt them more who rightly trust In this his satisfaction; so he dies, But soon revives, Death over him no power Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light Returne, the Starres of Morn shall see him rise Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light, Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems, His death for Man, as many as offerd Life Neglect not, and the benefit imbrace By Faith not void of works: this God-like act Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldst have dy'd, In sin for ever lost from life; this act Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength Defeating Sin and Death, his two maine armes, And fix farr deeper in his head thir stings Then temporal death shall bruise the Victors heel, Or theirs whom he redeems, a death like sleep, A gentle wafting to immortal Life. Nor after resurrection shall he stay Longer on Earth then certaine times to appeer Still follow'd him; to them shall leave in charge To teach all nations what of him they learn'd And his Salvation, them who shall beleeve Baptizing in the profluent streame, the signe Of washing them from guilt of sin to Life Pure, and in mind prepar'd, if so befall, For death, like that which the redeemer dy'd. All Nations they shall teach; for from that day Not onely to the Sons of Abrahams Loines Salvation shall be Preacht, but to the Sons Of Abrahams Faith wherever through the world; So in his seed all Nations shall be blest. Then to the Heav'n of Heav'ns he shall ascend With victory, triumphing through the aire Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise The Serpent, Prince of aire, and drag in Chaines Through all his realme, & there confounded leave; Then enter into glory, and resume His Seat at Gods right hand, exalted high Above all names in Heav'n; and thence shall come, When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe, With glory and power to judge both quick & dead, To judge th' unfaithful dead, but to reward His faithful, and receave them into bliss, Whether in Heav'n or Earth, for then the Earth Shall all be Paradise, far happier place Then this of Eden, and far happier daies. So spake th' Archangel Michael, then paus'd, As at the Worlds great period; and our Sire Replete with joy and wonder thus repli'd. O goodness infinite, goodness immense! That all this good of evil shall produce, And evil turn to good; more wonderful Then that which by creation first brought forth Light out of darkness! full of doubt I stand, Whether I should repent me now of sin By mee done and occasiond, or rejoyce Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring, To God more glory, more good will to Men From God, and over wrauth grace shall abound. But say, if our deliverer up to Heav'n Must reascend, what will betide the few His faithful, left among th' unfaithful herd, The enemies of truth; who then shall guide His people, who defend? will they not deale Wors with his followers then with him they dealt? Be sure they will, said th' Angel; but from Heav'n Hee to his own a Comforter will send, The promise of the Father, who shall dwell His Spirit within them, and the Law of Faith Working through love, upon thir hearts shall write, To guide them in all truth, and also arme With spiritual Armour, able to resist Satans assaults, and quench his fierie darts What Man can do against them, not affraid, Though to the death, against such cruelties With inward consolations recompenc't, And oft supported so as shall amaze Thir proudest persecuters: for the Spirit Powrd first on his Apostles, whom he sends To evangelize the Nations, then on all Baptiz'd, shall them with wondrous gifts endue To speak all Tongues, and do all Miracles, As did thir Lord before them. Thus they win Great numbers of each Nation to receave With joy the tidings brought from Heav'n: at length Thir Ministry perform'd, and race well run, Thir doctrine and thir story written left, They die; but in thir room, as they forewarne, Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous Wolves, Who all the sacred mysteries of Heav'n To thir own vile advantages shall turne Of lucre and ambition, and the truth With superstitions and traditions taint, Left onely in those written Records pure, Though not but by the Spirit understood. Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names, Places and titles, and with these to joine Secular power, though feigning still to act By spiritual, to themselves appropriating The Spirit of God, promisd alike and giv'n To all Beleevers; and from that pretense, Spiritual Lawes by carnal power shall force On every conscience; Laws which none shall finde Left them inrould, or what the Spirit within Shall on the heart engrave. What will they then But force the Spirit of Grace it self, and binde His consort Libertie; what, but unbuild His living Temples, built by Faith to stand, Thir own Faith not anothers: for on Earth Who against Faith and Conscience can be heard Infallible? yet many will presume: Whence heavie persecution shall arise On all who in the worship persevere Of Spirit and Truth; the rest, farr greater part, Will deem in outward Rites and specious formes Religion satisfi'd; Truth shall retire Bestuck with slandrous darts, and works of Faith Rarely be found: so shall the World goe on, To good malignant, to bad men benigne, Under her own waight groaning, till the day Appeer of respiration to the just, And vengeance to the wicked, at return Of him so lately promis'd to thy aid, The Womans seed, obscurely then foretold, Now amplier known thy Saviour and thy Lord, Last in the Clouds from Heav'n to be reveald In glory of the Father, to dissolve Satan with his perverted World, then raise From the conflagrant mass, purg'd and refin'd, New Heav'ns, new Earth, Ages of endless date Founded in righteousness and peace and love, To bring forth fruits Joy and eternal Bliss. He ended; and thus Adam last reply'd. How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest, Measur'd this transient World, the Race of time, Till time stand fixt: beyond is all abyss, Eternitie, whose end no eye can reach. Greatly instructed I shall hence depart, Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill Of knowledge, what this vessel can containe; Beyond which was my folly to aspire. Henceforth I learne, that to obey is best, And love with feare the onely God, to walk As in his presence, ever to observe His providence, and on him sole depend, Merciful over all his works, with good Still overcoming evil, and by small Accomplishing great things, by things deemd weak Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise By simply meek; that suffering for Truths sake Is fortitude to highest victorie, And to the faithful Death the Gate of Life; Taught this by his example whom I now Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest. To whom thus also th' Angel last repli'd: This having learnt, thou hast attaind the summe Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the Starrs Thou knewst by name, and all th' ethereal Powers, All secrets of the deep, all Natures works, Or works of God in Heav'n, Air, Earth, or Sea, And all the riches of this World enjoydst, And all the rule, one Empire; onely add Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add Faith, By name to come call'd Charitie, the soul Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loath To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess A Paradise within thee, happier farr. Let us descend now therefore from this top Of Speculation; for the hour precise Exacts our parting hence; and see the Guards, By mee encampt on yonder Hill, expect Thir motion, at whose Front a flaming Sword, In signal of remove, waves fiercely round; We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve; Her also I with gentle Dreams have calm'd Portending good, and all her spirits compos'd To meek submission: thou at season fit Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard, Chiefly what may concern her Faith to know, The great deliverance by her Seed to come That ye may live, which will be many dayes, Both in one Faith unanimous though sad, With cause for evils past, yet much more cheer'd With meditation on the happie end. He ended, and they both descend the Hill; Descended, Adam to the Bowre where Eve Lay sleeping ran before, but found her wak't; And thus with words not sad she him receav'd. Whence thou returnst, & whither wentst, I know; For God is also in sleep, and Dreams advise, Which he hath sent propitious, some great good Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress Wearied I fell asleep: but now lead on; In mee is no delay; with thee to goe, Is to stay here; without thee here to stay, Is to go hence unwilling; thou to mee Art all things under Heav'n, all places thou, Who for my wilful crime art banisht hence. This further consolation yet secure I carry hence; though all by mee is lost, Such favour I unworthie am voutsaft, By mee the Promis'd Seed shall all restore. So spake our Mother Eve, and Adam heard Well pleas'd, but answer'd not; for now too nigh Th' Archangel stood, and from the other Hill To thir fixt Station, all in bright array The Cherubim descended; on the ground Gliding meteorous, as Ev'ning Mist Ris'n from a River o're the marish glides, And gathers ground fast at the Labourers heel Homeward returning. High in Front advanc't, The brandisht Sword of God before them blaz'd Fierce as a Comet; which with torrid heat, And vapour as the Libyan Air adust, Began to parch that temperate Clime; whereat In either hand the hastning Angel caught Our lingring Parents, and to th' Eastern Gate Let them direct, and down the Cliff as fast To the subjected Plaine; then disappeer'd. They looking back, all th' Eastern side beheld Of Paradise, so late thir happie seat, Wav'd over by that flaming Brand, the Gate With dreadful Faces throng'd and fierie Armes: Som natural tears they drop'd, but wip'd them soon; The World was all before them, where to choose Thir place of rest, and Providence thir guide: They hand in hand with wandring steps and slow, Through Eden took thir solitarie way. The gentlest shepherdess that lives this day, And most resembling, both in shape and spright, Her brother dear. Underneath this sable herse Lies the subject of all verse, Sidney's sister, Pembroke's mother. Death, ere thou hast slain another, Learn'd, and fair, and good as she, Time shall throw a dart at thee. Join mates in mirth to me, Grant pleasure to our meeting; Let Pan, our good god, see How grateful is our greeting. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. Ye hymns and singing skill Of god Apollo's giving, Be pressed our reeds to fill With sound of music living. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. Sweet Orpheus' harp, whose sound The stedfast mountains moved, Let there thy skill abound, To join sweet friends beloved. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. My two and I be met, A happy blessed trinity, As three more jointly set In firmest band of unity. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. The number best beloved, Within my heart you be In friendship unremoved. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. Give leave your flocks to range, Let us the while be playing; Within the elmy grange, Your flocks will not be straying. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. Cause all the mirth you can, Since I am now come hither, Who never joy, but when I am with you together. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. Like lovers do their love, So joy I in you seeing: Let nothing me remove From always with you being. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. And as the turtle dove To mate with whom he liveth, Such comfort fervent love Of you to my heart giveth. Join hearts and hands, so let it be, Make but one mind in bodies three. Now joined be our hands, Let them be ne'er asunder, But link'd in binding bands By metamorphosed wonder. So should our severed bodies three As one for ever joined be. Walking in bright Phoebus' blaze, Where with heat oppressed I was, I got to a shady wood, Where green leaves did newly bud; And of grass was plenty dwelling, Decked with pied flowers sweetly smelling. In this wood a man I met, On lamenting wholly set; Ruing change of wonted state, Whence he was transformed late, Once to shepherds' God retaining, Now in servile court remaining. There he wand'ring malecontent, Up and down perplexed went, Daring not to tell to me, Spake unto a senseless tree, One among the rest electing, These same words, or this affecting: My old mates I grieve to see Void of me in field to be, Where we once our lovely sheep Lovingly like friends did keep; Oft each other's friendship proving, Never striving, but in loving. But may love abiding be In poor shepherds' base degree? It belongs to such alone To whom art of love is known: Seely shepherds are not witting What in art of love is fitting. Nay, what need the art to those To whom we our love disclose? It is to be used then, When we do but flatter men: Friendship true, in heart assured, Is by Nature's gifts procured. Therefore shepherds, wanting skill, Can Love's duties best fulfil; Since they know not how to feign, Nor with love to cloak disdain, Like the wiser sort, whose learning Hides their inward will of harming. Well was I, while under shade Oaten reeds me music made, Striving with my mates in song; Mixing mirth our songs among. Greater was the shepherd's treasure Than this false, fine, courtly pleasure. Where how many creatures be, So many puffed in mind I see; Like to Juno's birds of pride, Scarce each other can abide: Friends like to black swans appearing, Sooner these than those in hearing. Therefore, Pan, if thou may'st be Made to listen unto me, Grant, I say, if seely man May make treaty to god Pan, That I, without thy denying, May be still to thee relying. Only for my two loves' sake, In whose love I pleasure take; Only two do me delight With their ever-pleasing sight; Of all men to thee retaining, Grant me with those two remaining. So shall I to thee always With my reeds sound mighty praise: And first lamb that shall befall, Yearly deck thine altar shall, If it please thee to be reflected, And I from thee not rejected. So I left him in that place, Taking pity on his case; Learning this among the rest, That the mean estate is best; Better filled with contenting, Void of wishing and repenting. Ring out your bells, let mourning shows be spread, For Love is dead: All Love is dead, infected With plague of deep disdain: Worth, as nought worth, rejected, And faith fair scorn doth gain. From so ungrateful fancy; From such a female frenzy; From them that use men thus, Good Lord, deliver us. Weep, neighbours, weep, do you not hear it said That Love is dead: His death-bed, peacock's folly: His winding-sheet is shame; His will, false-seeming holy, His sole executor, blame. From so ungrateful fancy; From such a female frenzy; From them that use men thus, Good Lord, deliver us. Let dirge be sung, and trentals rightly read, For Love is dead: Sir Wrong his tomb ordaineth My mistress' marble heart; Which epitaph containeth, Her eyes were once his dart. From so ungrateful fancy; From such a female frenzy; From them that use men thus, Good Lord, deliver us. Alas! I lie: rage hath this error bred; Love is not dead, Love is not dead, but sleepeth In her unmatched mind: Where she his counsel keepeth Till due deserts she find. Therefore from so vile fancy, To call such wit a frenzy: Who Love can temper thus, Good Lord, deliver us. Ah, poor Love, why dost thou live, Thus to see thy service lost; If she will no comfort give, Make an end, yield up the ghost! That she may, at length, approve That she hardly long believed, That the heart will die for love That is not in time relieved. Oh, that ever I was born Service so to be refused; Faithful love to be forborn! Never love was so abused. But, sweet Love, be still awhile; She that hurt thee, Love, may heal thee; Sweet! I see within her smile More than reason can reveal thee. For, though she be rich and fair, Yet she is both wise and kind, And, therefore, do thou not despair But thy faith may fancy find. Yet, although she be a queen That may such a snake despise, Yet, with silence all unseen, Run, and hide thee in her eyes: Where if she will let thee die, Yet at latest gasp of breath, Say that in a lady's eye Love both took his life and death. Philoclea and Pamela sweet, By chance, in one great house did meet; And meeting, did so join in heart, That th' one from th' other could not part: And who indeed not made of stones Would separate such lovely ones? The one is beautiful, and fair As orient pearls and rubies are; And sweet as, after gentle showers, The breath is of some thousand flowers: For due proportion, such an air Circles the other, and so fair, That it her brownness beautifies, And doth enchant the wisest eyes. Have you not seen, on some great day, Two goodly horses, white and bay, Which were so beauteous in their pride, You knew not which to choose or ride? Such are these two; you scarce can tell, Which is the daintier bonny belle; And they are such, as, by my troth, I had been sick with love of both, And might have sadly said, 'Good-night Discretion and good fortune quite;' But that young Cupid, my old master, Presented me a sovereign plaster: Mopsa! ev'n Mopsa! precious pet Whose lips of marble, teeth of jet, Are spells and charms of strong defence, To conjure down concupiscence. How oft have I been reft of sense, By gazing on their excellence, But meeting Mopsa in my way, And looking on her face of clay, Been healed, and cured, and made as sound, As though I ne'er had had a wound? And when in tables of my heart, Love wrought such things as bred my smart, Mopsa would come, with face of clout, And in an instant wipe them out. And when their faces made me sick, Mopsa would come, with face of brick, A little heated in the fire, And break the neck of my desire. Now from their face I turn mine eyes, But cruel panthers! they surprise Me with their breath, that incense sweet, Which only for the gods is meet, And jointly from them doth respire, Like both the Indies set on fire: Which so o'ercomes man's ravished sense, That souls, to follow it, fly hence. No such-like smell you if you range To th' Stocks, or Cornhill's square Exchange; There stood I still as any stock, Till Mopsa, with her puddle dock, Her compound or electuary, Made of old ling and young canary, Bloat-herring, cheese, and voided physic, Being somewhat troubled with a phthisic, Did cough, and fetch a sigh so deep, As did her very bottom sweep: Whereby to all she did impart, How love lay rankling at her heart: Which, when I smelt, desire was slain, And they breathed forth perfumes in vain. Their angel voice surprised me now; But Mopsa, her Too-whit, Too-whoo, Descending through her oboe nose, Did that distemper soon compose. And, therefore, O thou precious owl, The wise Minerva's only fowl; What, at thy shrine, shall I devise To offer up a sacrifice? Hang AEsculapius, and Apollo, And Ovid, with his precious shallow. Mopsa is love's best medicine, True water to a lover's wine. Nay, she's the yellow antidote, Both bred and born to cut Love's throat: Be but my second, and stand by, Mopsa, and I'll them both defy; And all else of those gallant races, Who wear infection in their faces; For thy face that Medusa's shield! Will bring me safe out of the field. O fair! O sweet! when I do look on thee, In whom all joys so well agree, Heart and soul do sing in me. This you hear is not my tongue, Which once said what I conceived; For it was of use bereaved, With a cruel answer stung. No! though tongue to roof be cleaved, Fearing lest he chastised be, Heart and soul do sing in me. O fair! O sweet! when I do look on thee, In whom all joys so well agree, Just accord all music makes; In thee just accord excelleth, Where each part in such peace dwelleth, One of other beauty takes. Since then truth to all minds telleth, That in thee lives harmony, Heart and soul do sing in me. O fair! O sweet! when I do look on thee, In whom all joys so well agree, They that heaven have known do say, That whoso that grace obtaineth, To see what fair sight there reigneth, Forced are to sing alway: So then since that heaven remaineth In thy face, I plainly see, Heart and soul do sing in me. O fair! O sweet! when I do look on thee, In whom all joys so well agree, Sweet, think not I am at ease, For because my chief part singeth; This song from death's sorrow springeth: As to swan in last disease: Stay to true love's melody: Heart and soul do sing in me. You better sure shall live, not evermore Trying high seas; nor, while sea's rage you flee, Pressing too much upon ill-harboured shore. The golden mean who loves, lives safely free From filth of foreworn house, and quiet lives, Released from court, where envy needs must be. The wind most oft the hugest pine tree grieves: The stately towers come down with greater fall: The highest hills the bolt of thunder cleaves. Evil haps do fill with hope, good haps appall With fear of change, the courage well prepared: Foul winters, as they come, away they shall. Though present times, and past, with evils be snared, They shall not last: with cithern silent Muse, Apollo wakes, and bow hath sometime spared. In hard estate, with stout shows, valour use, The same man still, in whom wisdom prevails; In too full wind draw in thy swelling sails. Prometheus, when first from heaven high He brought down fire, till then on earth not seen; Fond of delight, a satyr, standing by, Gave it a kiss, as it like sweet had been. Feeling forthwith the other burning power, Wood with the smart, with shouts and shrieking shrill, He sought his ease in river, field, and bower; But, for the time, his grief went with him still. So silly I, with that unwonted sight, In human shape an angel from above, Feeding mine eyes, th' impression there did light; That since I run and rest as pleaseth love: The difference is, the satyr's lips, my heart, He for a while, I evermore, have smart. A satyr once did run away for dread, With sound of horn which he himself did blow: Fearing and feared, thus from himself he fled, Deeming strange evil in that he did not know. Such causeless fears when coward minds do take, It makes them fly that which they fain would have; As this poor beast, who did his rest forsake, Thinking not why, but how, himself to save. Ev'n thus might I, for doubts which I conceive Of mine own words, my own good hap betray; And thus might I, for fear of may be, leave The sweet pursuit of my desired prey. Better like I thy satyr, dearest Dyer, Who burnt his lips to kiss fair shining fire. My mistress lowers, and saith I do not love: I do protest, and seek with service due, In humble mind, a constant faith to prove; But for all this, I cannot her remove From deep vain thought that I may not be true. If oaths might serve, ev'n by the Stygian lake, Which poets say the gods themselves do fear, I never did my vowed word forsake: For why should I, whom free choice slave doth make, Else-what in face, than in my fancy bear? My Muse, therefore, for only thou canst tell, Tell me the cause of this my causeless woe? Tell, how ill thought disgraced my doing well? Tell, how my joys and hopes thus foully fell To so low ebb that wonted were to flow? O this it is, the knotted straw is found; In tender hearts, small things engender hate: A horse's worth laid waste the Trojan ground; A three-foot stool in Greece made trumpets sound; An ass's shade e'er now hath bred debate. If Greeks themselves were moved with so small cause, To twist those broils, which hardly would untwine: Should ladies fair be tied to such hard laws, As in their moods to take a ling'ring pause? I would it not, their metal is too fine. My hand doth not bear witness with my heart, She saith, because I make no woeful lays, To paint my living death and endless smart: And so, for one that felt god Cupid's dart, She thinks I lead and live too merry days. Are poets then the only lovers true, Whose hearts are set on measuring a verse? Who think themselves well blest, if they renew Some good old dump that Chaucer's mistress knew; And use but you for matters to rehearse. Then, good Apollo, do away thy bow: Take harp and sing in this our versing time, And in my brain some sacred humour flow, That all the earth my woes, sighs, tears may know; And see you not that I fall low to rhyme. As for my mirth, how could I but be glad, Whilst that methought I justly made my boast That only I the only mistress had? But now, if e'er my face with joy be clad, Think Hannibal did laugh when Carthage lost. Sweet lady, as for those whose sullen cheer, Compared to me, made me in lightness sound; Who, stoic-like, in cloudy hue appear; Who silence force to make their words more dear; Whose eyes seem chaste, because they look on ground: Believe them not, for physic true doth find, Choler adust is joyed in woman-kind. Show that we do not grudge at all when others do rejoice. With sight made dim with daily tears another's sport to see. Whoever lambkins saw, yet lambkins love to play, To play when that their loved dams are stolen or gone astray? If this in them be true, as true in men think I, A lustless song forsooth thinks he that hath more lust to cry. A time there is for all, my mother often says, Now let those lightsome sights we see thy darkness overcome. That comfort in these sports you like, my mind his comfort tries. What? Is thy bagpipe broke, or are thy lambs miswent; Thy wallet or thy tar-box lost; or thy new raiment-rent? tell. Whose wages make me beg the more, who feeds me till I starve; Whose livery is such, as most I freeze apparelled most, And looks so near unto my cure, that I must needs be lost. Who bound thee? What witnesses thereto? What seal? Who made the band so fast? past. What keepeth safe thy band? Lock'd fast with knowing that she is of worldly things the best. If wages make you want, what food is that she gives? What living get you then? So have I cause myself to plain, but no cause to complain. What care takes she for thee? My freedom, with show of her beams, with virtue, my content. God shield us from such dames! If so our dames be sped, The shepherds will grow lean I trow, their sheep will be ill-fed. The arrow being shot from far doth give the smaller blow. That foxes leave to steal, they find they die therefore. For nothing can more tedious be than plaint in time of joy. But hence, even hence, I must needs go; such is my dogged fate. To the tune of Wilhelmus van Nassau, &c. Who hath his fancy pleased, With fruits of happy sight, Let here his eyes be raised On Nature's sweetest light; A light which doth dissever, And yet unite the eyes; A light which, dying, never Is cause the looker dies. She never dies, but lasteth In life of lover's heart; He ever dies that wasteth In love his chiefest part. Thus is her life still guarded, In never dying faith; Thus is his death rewarded, Since she lives in his death. Look then and die, the pleasure Doth answer well the pain; Small loss of mortal treasure, Who may immortal gain. Immortal be her graces, Immortal is her mind; They, fit for heavenly places, This heaven in it doth bind. But eyes these beauties see not, Nor sense that grace descries; Yet eyes deprived be not From sight of her fair eyes: Which, as of inward glory They are the outward seal, So may they live still sorry, Which die not in that weal. But who hath fancies pleased, With fruits of happy sight, Let here his eyes be raised On Nature's sweetest light. Who hath e'er felt the change of love, And known those pangs that losers prove, May paint my face without seeing me, And write the state how my fancies be, The loathsome buds grown on Sorrow's tree. But who by hearsay speaks, and hath not fully felt What kind of fires they be in which those spirits melt, Shall guess, and fail, what doth displease, Feeling my pulse, miss my disease. O no! O no! trial only shows The bitter juice of forsaken woes; Where former bliss, present evils do stain; Nay, former bliss adds to present pain, While remembrance doth both states contain. Come, learners, then to me, the model of mishap, Ingulphed in despair, slid down from Fortune's lap; And, as you like my double lot, Tread in my steps, or follow not. For me, alas! I am full resolved Those bands, alas! shall not be dissolved; Nor break my word, though reward come late; Nor fail my faith in my failing fate; Nor change in change, though change change my state: But always own myself, with eagle-eyed Truth, to fly Up to the sun, although the sun my wings do fry; For if those flames burn my desire, Yet shall I die in Phoenix' fire. When, to my deadly pleasure, When to my lively torment, Lady, mine eyes remained Joined, alas! to your beams. With violence of heavenly Beauty, tied to virtue; Reason abashed retired; Gladly my senses yielded. Gladly my senses yielding, Thus to betray my heart's fort, Left me devoid of all life. They to the beamy suns went, Where, by the death of all deaths, Find to what harm they hastened. Like to the silly Sylvan, Burned by the light he best liked, When with a fire he first met. Yet, yet, a life to their death, Lady you have reserved; Lady the life of all love. For though my sense be from me, And I be dead, who want sense, Yet do we both live in you. Turned anew, by your means, Unto the flower that aye turns, As you, alas! my sun bends. Thus do I fall to rise thus; Thus do I die to live thus; Changed to a change, I change not. Thus may I not be from you; Thus be my senses on you; Thus what I think is of you; Thus what I seek is in you; All what I am, it is you. No, no, no, no, I cannot hate my foe, Although with cruel fire, First thrown on my desire, She sacks my rendered sprite; For so fair a flame embraces All the places, Where that heat of all heats springeth, That it bringeth To my dying heart some pleasure, Since his treasure Burneth bright in fairest light. No, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, I cannot hate my foe, Although with cruel fire, First thrown on my desire, She sacks my rendered sprite; Since our lives be not immortal, But to mortal Fetters tied, do wait the hour Of death's power, They have no cause to be sorry Who with glory End the way, where all men stay. No, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, I cannot hate my foe, Although with cruel fire, First thrown on my desire, She sacks my rendered sprite; No man doubts, whom beauty killeth, Fair death feeleth, And in whom fair death proceedeth, Glory breedeth: So that I, in her beams dying, Glory trying, Though in pain, cannot complain. No, no, no, no. To the tune of a Neapolitan Villanel. All my sense thy sweetness gained; Thy fair hair my heart enchained; My poor reason thy words moved, So that thee, like heaven, I loved. Fa, la, la, leridan, dan, dan, dan, deridan: Dan, dan, dan, deridan, deridan, dei: While to my mind the outside stood, For messenger of inward good. Nor thy sweetness sour is deemed; Thy hair not worth a hair esteemed; Reason hath thy words removed, Finding that but words they proved. Fa, la, la, leridan, dan, dan, dan, deridan, Dan, dan, dan, deridan, deridan, dei: For no fair sign can credit win, If that the substance fail within. No more in thy sweetness glory, For thy knitting hair be sorry; Use thy words but to bewail thee That no more thy beams avail thee; Dan, dan, Dan, dan, Lay not thy colours more to view, Without the picture be found true. Woe to me, alas, she weepeth! Fool! in me what folly creepeth? Was I to blaspheme enraged, Where my soul I have engaged? Dan, dan, Dan, dan, And wretched I must yield to this; The fault I blame her chasteness is. Sweetness! sweetly pardon folly; Tie me, hair, your captive wholly: Words! O words of heavenly knowledge! Know, my words their faults acknowledge; Dan, dan, Dan, dan, And all my life I will confess, The less I love, I live the less. From La Diana de Monte-Mayor, in Spanish: where Sireno, a What changes here, O hair, I see, since I saw you! How ill fits you this green to wear, For hope, the colour due! Indeed, I well did hope, Though hope were mixed with fear, No other shepherd should have scope Once to approach this hair. Ah hair! how many days My Dian made me show, With thousand pretty childish plays, If I ware you or no: Alas, how oft with tears, - O tears of guileful breast! - She seemed full of jealous fears, Whereat I did but jest. Tell me, O hair of gold, If I then faulty be, That trust those killing eyes I would, Since they did warrant me? Have you not seen her mood, What streams of tears she spent, 'Till that I sware my faith so stood, As her words had it bent? Who hath such beauty seen In one that changeth so? Or where one's love so constant been, Who ever saw such woe? Ah, hair! are you not grieved To come from whence you be, Seeing how once you saw I lived, To see me as you see? On sandy bank of late, I saw this woman sit; Where, Sooner die than change my state, She with her finger writ: Thus my belief was staid, Behold Love's mighty hand On things were by a woman said, And written in the sand. The same Sireno in Monte-Mayor, holding his mistress's glass before her, and looking upon her while she viewed herself, thus Of this high grace, with bliss conjoined, No farther debt on me is laid, Since that in self-same metal coined, Sweet lady, you remain well paid; For if my place give me great pleasure, Having before my nature's treasure, In face and eyes unmatched being, You have the same in my hands, seeing What in your face mine eyes do measure. Nor think the match unevenly made, That of those beams in you do tarry, The glass to you but gives a shade, To me mine eyes the true shape carry; For such a thought most highly prized, Which ever hath Love's yoke despised, Better than one captived perceiveth, Though he the lively form receiveth, The other sees it but disguised. The dart, the beams, the sting, so strong I prove, Which my chief part doth pass through, parch, and tie, That of the stroke, the heat, and knot of love, Wounded, inflamed, knit to the death, I die. Hardened and cold, far from affection's snare Was once my mind, my temper, and my life; While I that sight, desire, and vow forbare, Which to avoid, quench, lose, nought boasted strife. Yet will not I grief, ashes, thraldom change For others' ease, their fruit, or free estate; So brave a shot, dear fire, and beauty strange, Bid me pierce, burn, and bind, long time and late, And in my wounds, my flames, and bonds, I find A salve, fresh air, and bright contented mind. Virtue, beauty, and speech, did strike, wound, charm, My heart, eyes, ears, with wonder, love, delight, First, second, last, did bind, enforce, and arm, His works, shows, suits, with wit, grace, and vows' might, Thus honour, liking, trust, much, far, and deep, Held, pierced, possessed, my judgment, sense, and will, Till wrongs, contempt, deceit, did grow, steal, creep, Bands, favour, faith, to break, defile, and kill, Then grief, unkindness, proof, took, kindled, taught, Well-grounded, noble, due, spite, rage, disdain: But ah, alas! in vain my mind, sight, thought, Doth him, his face, his words, leave, shun, refrain. For nothing, time, nor place, can loose, quench, ease Mine own embraced, sought, knot, fire, disease. Faint amorist, what, dost thou think To taste Love's honey, and not drink One dram of gall? or to devour A world of sweet, and taste no sour? Dost thou ever think to enter Th' Elysian fields, that dar'st not venture In Charon's barge? a lover's mind Must use to sail with every wind. He that loves and fears to try, Learns his mistress to deny. Doth she chide thee? 'tis to show it, That thy coldness makes her do it: Is she silent? is she mute? Silence fully grants thy suit: Doth she pout, and leave the room? Then she goes to bid thee come: Is she sick? why then be sure, She invites thee to the cure: Doth she cross thy suit with No? Tush, she loves to hear thee woo: Doth she call the faith of man In question? Nay, she loves thee than; And if e'er she makes a blot, She's lost if that thou hit'st her not. He that after ten denials, Dares attempt no farther trials, Hath no warrant to acquire The dainties of his chaste desire. Since shunning pain, I ease can never find; Since bashful dread seeks where he knows me harmed; Since will is won, and stopped ears are charmed; Since force doth faint, and sight doth make me blind; Since loosing long, the faster still I bind; Since naked sense can conquer reason armed; Since heart, in chilling fear, with ice is warmed; In fine, since strife of thought but mars the mind, I yield, O Love, unto thy loathed yoke, Yet craving law of arms, whose rule doth teach, That, hardly used, who ever prison broke, In justice quit, of honour made no breach: Whereas, if I a grateful guardian have, Thou art my lord, and I thy vowed slave. When Love puffed up with rage of high disdain, Resolved to make me pattern of his might, Like foe, whose wits inclined to deadly spite, Would often kill, to breed more feeling pain; He would not, armed with beauty, only reign On those affects which easily yield to sight; But virtue sets so high, that reason's light, For all his strife can only bondage gain: So that I live to pay a mortal fee, Dead palsy-sick of all my chiefest parts, Like those whom dreams make ugly monsters see, And can cry help with naught but groans and starts: Longing to have, having no wit to wish, To starving minds such is god Cupid's dish. To the tune of Non credo gia che piu infelice amante. The nightingale, as soon as April bringeth Unto her rested sense a perfect waking, While late bare earth, proud of new clothing, springeth, Sings out her woes, a thorn her song-book making; And mournfully bewailing, Her throat in tunes expresseth What grief her breast oppresseth, For Tereus' force on her chaste will prevailing. O Philomela fair! O take some gladness, That here is juster cause of plaintful sadness: Thine earth now springs, mine fadeth; Thy thorn without, my thorn my heart invadeth. Alas! she hath no other cause of anguish, But Tereus' love, on her by strong hand wroken, Wherein she suffering, all her spirits languish, Full womanlike, complains her will was broken, But I, who daily craving, Cannot have to content me, Have more cause to lament me, Since wanting is more woe than too much having. O Philomela fair! O take some gladness, That here is juster cause of plaintful sadness: Thine earth now springs, mine fadeth; Thy thorn without, my thorn my heart invadeth. To the tune of Basciami vita mia. Sleep, baby mine, Desire's nurse, Beauty, singeth; Thy cries, O baby, set mine head on aching: The babe cries, 'Way, thy love doth keep me waking. Lully, lully, my babe, Hope cradle bringeth Unto my children alway good rest taking: The babe cries, Way, thy love doth keep me waking. Since, baby mine, from me thy watching springeth, Sleep then a little, pap Content is making; The babe cries, Nay, for that abide I waking. The scourge of life, and death's extreme disgrace; The smoke of hell, the monster called Pain: Long shamed to be accursed in every place, By them who of his rude resort complain; Like crafty wretch, by time and travel taught, His ugly evil in others' good to hide; Late harbours in her face, whom Nature wrought As treasure-house where her best gifts do bide; And so by privilege of sacred seat, A seat where beauty shines and virtue reigns, He hopes for some small praise, since she hath great, Within her beams wrapping his cruel stains. Ah, saucy Pain, let not thy terror last, More loving eyes she draws, more hate thou hast. Woe! woe to me, on me return the smart: My burning tongue hath bred my mistress pain? For oft in pain, to pain my painful heart, With her due praise did of my state complain. I praised her eyes, whom never chance doth move; Her breath, which makes a sour answer sweet; Her milken breasts, the nurse of child-like love; Her legs, O legs! her aye well-stepping feet: Pain heard her praise, and full of inward fire, First sealing up my heart as prey of his He flies to her, and, boldened with desire, Her face, this age's praise, the thief doth kiss. O Pain! I now recant the praise I gave, And swear she is not worthy thee to have. Thou pain, the only guest of loathed Constraint; The child of Curse, man's weakness foster-child; Brother to Woe, and father of Complaint: Thou Pain, thou hated Pain, from heaven exiled, How hold'st thou her whose eyes constraint doth fear, Whom cursed do bless; whose weakness virtues arm; Who others' woes and plaints can chastely bear: In whose sweet heaven angels of high thoughts swarm? What courage strange hath caught thy caitiff heart? Fear'st not a face that oft whole hearts devours? Or art thou from above bid play this part, And so no help 'gainst envy of those powers? If thus, alas, yet while those parts have woe; So stay her tongue, that she no more say, O. And have I heard her say, O cruel pain! And doth she know what mould her beauty bears? Mourns she in truth, and thinks that others feign? Fears she to feel, and feels not others' fears? Or doth she think all pain the mind forbears? That heavy earth, not fiery spirits, may plain? That eyes weep worse than heart in bloody tears? That sense feels more than what doth sense contain? No, no, she is too wise, she knows her face Hath not such pain as it makes others have: She knows the sickness of that perfect place Hath yet such health, as it my life can save. But this, she thinks, our pain high cause excuseth, Where her, who should rule pain, false pain abuseth. Like as the dove, which seeled up doth fly, Is neither freed, nor yet to service bound; But hopes to gain some help by mounting high, Till want of force do force her fall to ground: Right so my mind, caught by his guiding eye, And thence cast off where his sweet hurt he found, Hath neither leave to live, nor doom to die; Nor held in evil, nor suffered to be sound. But with his wings of fancies up he goes, To high conceits, whose fruits are oft but small; Till wounded, blind, and wearied spirit, lose Both force to fly, and knowledge where to fall: O happy dove, if she no bondage tried! More happy I, might I in bondage bide! In wonted walks, since wonted fancies change, Some cause there is, which of strange cause doth rise: For in each thing whereto mine eye doth range, Part of my pain, me-seems, engraved lies. The rocks, which were of constant mind the mark, In climbing steep, now hard refusal show; The shading woods seem now my sun to dark, And stately hills disdain to look so low. The restful caves now restless visions give; In dales I see each way a hard ascent: Like late-mown meads, late cut from joy I live; Alas, sweet brooks do in my tears augment: Rocks, woods, hills, caves, dales, meads, brooks, answer me; Infected minds infect each thing they see. If I could think how these my thoughts to leave, Or thinking still, my thoughts might have good end; If rebel sense would reason's law receive; Or reason foiled, would not in vain contend: Then might I think what thoughts were best to think: Then might I wisely swim, or gladly sink. If either you would change your cruel heart, Or, cruel still, time did your beauties stain: If from my soul this love would once depart, Or for my love some love I might obtain; Then might I hope a change, or ease of mind, By your good help, or in myself, to find. But since my thoughts in thinking still are spent. With reason's strife, by senses overthrown; You fairer still, and still more cruel bent, I loving still a love that loveth none: I yield and strive, I kiss and curse the pain, Thought, reason, sense, time, You, and I, maintain. Oft have I mused, but now at length I find Why those that die, men say, they do depart: Depart: a word so gentle to my mind, Weakly did seem to paint Death's ugly dart. But now the stars, with their strange course, do bind Me one to leave, with whom I leave my heart; I hear a cry of spirits faint and blind, That parting thus, my chiefest part I part. Part of my life, the loathed part to me, Lives to impart my weary clay some breath; But that good part wherein all comforts be, Now dead, doth show departure is a death: Yea, worse than death, death parts both woe and joy, From joy I part, still living in annoy. Finding those beams, which I must ever love, To mar my mind, and with my hurt to please, I deemed it best, some absence for to prove, If farther place might further me to ease. My eyes thence drawn, where lived all their light, Blinded forthwith in dark despair did lie, Like to the mole, with want of guiding sight, Deep plunged in earth, deprived of the sky. In absence blind, and wearied with that woe, To greater woes, by presence, I return; Even as the fly, which to the flame doth go, Pleased with the light, that his small corse doth burn: Fair choice I have, either to live or die A blinded mole, or else a burned fly. Near Wilton sweet, huge heaps of stones are found, But so confused, that neither any eye Can count them just, nor Reason reason try, What force brought them to so unlikely ground. To stranger weights my mind's waste soil is bound, Of passion-hills, reaching to Reason's sky, From Fancy's earth, passing all number's bound, Passing all guess, whence into me should fly So mazed a mass; or, if in me it grows, A simple soul should breed so mixed woes. The Bruertons have a lake, which, when the sun Approaching warms, not else, dead logs up sends From hideous depth; which tribute, when it ends, Sore sign it is the lord's last thread is spun. My lake is Sense, whose still streams never run But when my sun her shining twins there bends; Then from his depth with force in her begun, Long drowned hopes to watery eyes it lends; But when that fails my dead hopes up to take, Their master is fair warned his will to make. We have a fish, by strangers much admired, Which caught, to cruel search yields his chief part: With gall cut out, closed up again by art, Yet lives until his life be new required. A stranger fish myself, not yet expired, Tho', rapt with Beauty's hook, I did impart Myself unto th' anatomy desired, Instead of gall, leaving to her my heart: Yet live with thoughts closed up, 'till that she will, By conquest's right, instead of searching, kill. Peak hath a cave, whose narrow entries find Large rooms within where drops distil amain: Till knit with cold, though there unknown remain, Deck that poor place with alabaster lined. Mine eyes the strait, the roomy cave, my mind; Whose cloudy thoughts let fall an inward rain Of sorrow's drops, till colder reason bind Their running fall into a constant vein Of truth, far more than alabaster pure, Which, though despised, yet still doth truth endure. A field there is, where, if a stake oe prest Deep in the earth, what hath in earth receipt, Is changed to stone in hardness, cold, and weight, The wood above doth soon consuming rest. The earth her ears; the stake is my request; Of which, how much may pierce to that sweet seat, To honour turned, doth dwell in honour's nest, Keeping that form, though void of wonted heat; But all the rest, which fear durst not apply, Failing themselves, with withered conscience die. Of ships by shipwreck cast on Albion's coast, Which rotting on the rocks, their death to die: From wooden bones and blood of pitch doth fly A bird, which gets more life than ship had lost. My ship, Desire, with wind of Lust long tost, Brake on fair cliffs of constant Chastity; Where plagued for rash attempt, gives up his ghost; So deep in seas of virtue, beauties lie: But of this death flies up the purest love, Which seeming less, yet nobler life doth move. These wonders England breeds; the last remains - A lady, in despite of Nature, chaste, On whom all love, in whom no love is placed, Where Fairness yields to Wisdom's shortest reins. A humble pride, a scorn that favour stains; A woman's mould, but like an angel graced; An angel's mind, but in a woman cased; A heaven on earth, or earth that heaven contains: Now thus this wonder to myself I frame; She is the cause that all the rest I am. Thou blind man's mark; thou fool's self-chosen snare, Fond fancy's scum, and dregs of scattered thought: Band of all evils; cradle of causeless care; Thou web of will, whose end is never wrought: Desire! Desire! I have too dearly bought, With price of mangled mind, thy worthless ware; Too long, too long, asleep thou hast me brought Who shouldst my mind to higher things prepare; But yet in vain thou hast my ruin sought; In vain thou mad'st me to vain things aspire; In vain thou kindlest all thy smoky fire: For Virtue hath this better lesson taught, Within myself to seek my only hire, Desiring nought but how to kill Desire. Leave me, O love! which reachest but to dust; And thou, my mind, aspire to higher things: Grow rich in that which never taketh rust; Whatever fades, but fading pleasure brings. Draw in thy beams, and humble all thy might To that sweet yoke where lasting freedoms be, Which breaks the clouds, and opens forth the light That doth both shine, and give us sight to see. O take fast hold! let that light be thy guide, In this small course which birth draws out to death, And think how evil becometh him to slide, Who seeketh heaven, and comes from heavenly breath. Then farewell, world, thy uttermost I see, Eternal Love, maintain thy life in me. Which his fair tongue conceit's expositor - Delivers in such apt and gracious words, That aged ears play truant at his tables, And younger hearings are quite ravished, So sweet and voluble is his discourse. Unlike in method, with concealed design Did crafty Horace his low numbers join; And, with a sly insinuating grace Laughed at his friend, and looked him in the face: Would raise a blush where secret vice he found; And tickle, while he gently probed the wound; With seeming innocence the crowd beguiled, <|endofpoem|> But made the desperate passes while he smiled. It chaunced me on day beside the shore Of silver streaming Thamesis to bee, Nigh where the goodly Verlame stood of yore, Of which there now remaines no memorie, Nor anie little moniment to see, By which the travailer that fares that way This once was she may warned be to say. There, on the other side, I did behold A Woman sitting sorrowfullie wailing, Rending her yeolow locks, like wyrie golde About her shoulders careleslie downe trailing, And streames of teares from her faire eyes forth railing : In her right hand a broken rod she held, Which towards heaven shee seemd on high to weld, Whether she were one of that rivers nymphes, Which did the losse of some dere Love lament, I doubt; or one of those three fatall impes Which draw the dayes of men forth in extent; Or th'auncient genius of that citie brent ; But, seeing her so piteouslie perplexed, I, to her calling, askt what her so vexed. Ah! what delight, quoth she, in earthlie thing, Or comfort can I, wretched creature, have? Whose happines the heavens envying, From highest staire to lowest step me drave, And have in mine owne bowels made my grave, That of all nations now I am forlorne , The worlds sad spectacle, and Fortunes scorne. Much was I mooved at her piteous plaint, And felt my heart nigh riven in my brest With tender ruth to see her sore constraint; That, shedding teares, a while I still did rest, And after did her name of her request. Name have I none, quoth she, nor anie being, Bereft of both by Fates uniust decreeing. I was that citie which the garland wore Of Britaines pride, delivered unto me By Romane victors which it wonne of yore; Though nought at all but ruines now I bee, And lye in mine owne ashes, as ye see, VERLAME I was; what bootes it that I was, Sith now I am but weedes and wastfull gras? O vaine worlds glorie, and unstedfast state Of all that lives on face of sinfull earth! Which, from their first untill their utmost date, Tast no one hower of happines or merth; But like as at the ingate of their berth They crying creep out of their mothers woomb, So wailing backe go to their wofull toomb. Why then dooth flesh, a bubble-glas of breath, Hunt after honour and advauncement vaine, And reare a trophee for devouring death With so great labour and long-lasting paine, As if his daies for ever should remaine? Sith all that in this world is great or gaie Doth as a vapour vanish and decaie. Looke backe, who list, unto the former ages, And call to count what is of them become. Where be those learned wits and antique sages, Which of all wisedome knew the perfect somme? Where those great warriors, which did overcome The world with conquest of their might and maine, And made one meare of th'earth and of their raine? What nowe is of th'Assyrian Lyonesse, Of whome no footing now on earth appeares? What of the Persian Beares outragiousnesse, Whose memorie is quite worne out with yeares? Who of the Grecian Libbard now ought heares, That over-ran the East with greedie powre, And left his whelps their kingdomes to devoure? And where is that same great seven-headded beast, That made all nations vassals of her pride, To fall before her feete at her beheast, And in the necke of all the world did ride? Where doth she all that wondrous welth nowe hide? With her own weight downe pressed now shee lies, And by her heaps her hugenesse testifies. O Rome, thy ruine I lament and rue, And in thy fall my fatall overthrowe, That whilom was, whilst heavens with equall vewe Deignd to behold me and their gifts bestowe, The picture of thy pride in pompous shew: And of the whole world as thou wast the empresse, So I of this small Northerne world was princesse. To tell the beawtie of my buildings fayre, Adornd with purest golde and precious stone, To tell my riches and endowments rare, That by my foes are now all spent and gone, To tell my forces, matchable to none, Were but lost labour that few would beleeve, And with rehearsing would me more agreeve. High towers, faire temples, goodly theaters, Strong walls, rich porches, princelie pallaces, Large streetes, brave houses, sacred sepulchers, Sure gates, sweete gardens, stately galleries Wrought with faire pillours and fine imageries, All those, O pitie! now are turnd to dust, And overgrowen with blacke oblivions rust. Theretoo, for warlike power and peoples store In Britannie was none to match with mee, That manie often did abie full sore: Ne Troynovant , though elder sister shee, With my great forces might compared bee; That stout Pendragon to his perill felt, Who in a siege seaven yeres about me dwelt. But long ere this, Bunduca, Britonnesse, Her mightie hoast against my bulwarkes brought; Bunduca! that victorious conqueresse, That, lifting up her brave heroick thought Bove womens weaknes, with the Romanes fought, Fought, and in field against them thrice prevailed: Yet was she foyld, when as she me assailed. And though at last by force I conquered were Of hardie Saxons, and became their thrall, Yet was I with much bloodshed bought full deere, And prizde with slaughter of their generall, The moniment of whose sad funerall, For wonder of the world, long in me lasted, But now to nought, through spoyle of time, is wasted. Wasted it is, as if it never were; And all the rest that me so honord made, And of the world admired ev'rie where, Is turnd to smoake that doth to nothing fade; And of that brightnes now appeares no shade, But greislie shades, such as doo haunt in hell With fearfull fiends that in deep darknes dwell. Where my high steeples whilom usde to stand, On which the lordly faulcon wont to towre, There now is but an heap of lyme and sand For the shriche-owle to build her balefull bowre: And where the nightingale wont forth to powre Her restles plaints, to comfort wakefull lovers, There now haunt yelling mewes and whining plovers. And where the christall Thamis wont to slide In silver channell downe along the lee, About whose flowrie bankes on either side A thousand nymphes, with mirthfull iollitee, Were wont to play, from all annoyance free, There now no rivers course is to be seene, But moorish fennes, and marshes ever greene. Seemes that that gentle river, for great griefe Of my mishaps which oft I to him plained, Or for to shunne the horrible mischiefe With which he saw my cruell foes me pained, And his pure streames with guiltles blood oft stained, From my unhappie neighborhood farre fled, And his sweete waters away with him led. There also where the winged ships were seene In liquid waves to cut their fomie waie, And thousand fishers numbred to have been, In that wide lake looking for plenteous praie Of fish, which they with baits usde to betraie, Is now no lake, nor anie fishers store, Nor ever ship shall saile there anie more. They all are gone, and all with them is gone! Ne ought to me remaines, but to lament My long decay, which no man els doth mone, And mourne my fall with dolefull dreriment: Yet it is comfort in great languishment, To be bemoned with compassion kinde, And mitigates the anguish of the minde. But me no man bewaileth, but in game Ne sheddeth teares from lamentable eie; Nor anie lives that mentioneth my name To be remembred of posteritie, Save one, that maugre Fortunes iniurie, And Times decay, and Envies cruell tort , Hath writ my record in true-seeming sort. CAMBDEN! the nourice of antiquitie, And lanterne unto late succeding age To see the light of simple veritie Buried in ruines, through the great outrage Of her owne people led with warlike rage, CAMBDEN! though Time all moniments obscure, Yet thy iust labours ever shall endure. But whie, unhappie wight! doo I thus crie, And grieve that my remembrance quite is raced Out of the knowledge of posteritie, And all my antique moniments defaced? Sith I doo dailie see things highest placed, So soone as Fates their vitall thred have shorne, Forgotten quite as they were never borne It is not long, since these two eyes beheld A mightie Prince , of most renowmed race, Whom England high in count of honour held, And greatest ones did sue to game his grace; Of greatest ones he, greatest in his place, Sate in the bosom of his Soveraine, And Right and Loyall did his word maintaine. I saw him die, I saw him die as one Of the meane people, and brought foorth on beare; I saw him die, and no man left to mone His dolefull fate that late him loved deare; Scarse anie left to close his eylids neare; Scarse anie left upon his lips to laie The sacred sod, or requiem to saie. O trustlesse state of miserable men, That builde your blis on hope of earthly thing, And vainly thinke your selves halfe happie then, When painted faces with smooth flattering Doo fawne on you, and your wide praises sing; And, when the courting masker louteth lowe, Him true in heart and trustie to you trow! All is but fained, and with oaker dide, That everie shower will wash and wipe away; All things doo change that under heaven abide, And after death all friendship doth decaie. Therefore, what ever man bearst worldlie sway, Living, on God and on thy selfe relie; For, when thou diest, all shall with thee die. He now is dead, and all is with him dead, Save what in heavens storehouse he uplaid: His hope is faild, and come to passe his dread, And evill men now dead his deeds upbraid: Spite bites the dead, that living never baid. He now is gone, the whiles the foxe is crept Into the hole the which the badger swept. He now is dead, and all his glorie gone, And all his greatnes vapoured to nought, That as a glasse upon the water shone, Which vanisht quite so soone as it was sought. His name is worne alreadie out of thought, Ne anie poet seekes him to revive; Yet manie poets honourd him alive. Ne doth his Colin, carelesse Colin Cloute, Care now his idle bagpipe up to raise, Ne tell his sorrow to the listning rout Of shepherd groomes, which wont his songs to praise: Praise who so list, yet I will him dispraise, Untill he quite him of this guiltie blame. Wake, shepheards boy, at length awake for shame! And who so els did goodnes by him game, And who so els his bounteous minde did trie , Whether he shepheard be, or shepheards swaine, For manie did, which doo it now denie, Awake, and to his song a part applie: And I, the whilest you mourne for his decease, Will with my mourning plaints your plaint increase. He dyde, and after him his brother dyde, His brother prince, his brother noble peere, That whilste he lived was of none envyde, And dead is now, as living, counted deare; Deare unto all that true affection beare, But unto thee most deare, O dearest Dame, His noble spouse and paragon of fame. He, whilest he lived, happie was through thee, And, being dead, is happie now much more; Living, that lincked chaunst with thee to bee, And dead, because him dead thou dost adore As living, and thy lost deare love deplore. So whilst that thou, faire flower of chastitie, Dost live, by thee thy lord shall never die. Thy lord shall never die, the whiles this verse Shall live, and surely it shall live for ever: For ever it shall live, and shall rehearse His worthie praise, and vertues dying never, Though death his soule doo from his bodie sever: And thou thy selfe herein shalt also live; Such grace the heavens doo to my verses give. Ne shall his sister, ne thy father, die; Thy father, that good earle of rare renowne, And noble patrone of weake povertie; Whose great good deeds, in countrey and in towne. Have purchast him in heaven an happie crowne: Where he now liveth in eternall blis, And left his sonne t'ensue those steps of his. He, noble bud, his grandsires livelie hayre, Under the shadow of thy countenaunce Now ginnes to shoote up fast, and flourish fayre In learned artes, and goodlie governaunce, That him to highest honour shall advaunce. Brave impe of Bedford, grow apace in bountie, And count of wisedome more than of thy countie! Ne may I let thy husbands sister die, That goodly ladie, sith she eke did spring Out of this stocke and famous familie Whose praises I to future age doo sing; And foorth out of her happie womb did bring The sacred brood of learning and all honour; In whom the heavens powrde all their gifts upon her. Most gentle spirite breathed from above, Out of the bosome of the Makers blis, In whom all bountie and all vertuous love Appeared in their native propertis, And did enrich that noble breast of his With treasure passing all this worlds worth, Worthie of heaven it selfe, which brought it forth: His blessed spirite, full of power divine And influence of all celestiall grace, Loathing this sinfull earth and earthlie slime, Fled backe too soonc unto his native place; Too soone for all that did his love embrace, Too soone for all this wretched world, whom he Robd of all right and true nobilitie. Yet, ere his happie soule to heaven went Out of this fleshlie goale, he did devise Unto his heavenlie Maker to present His bodie, as a spotles sacrifise, And chose that guiltie hands of enemies Should powre forth th'offring of his guiltles blood: So life exchanging for his countries good. O noble spirite, live there ever blessed, The worlds late wonder, and the heavens new ioy; Live ever there, and leave me here distressed With mortall cares and cumbrous worlds anoy! But, where thou dost that happines enioy, Bid me, O bid me quicklie come to thee, That happie there I maie thee alwaies see! Yet, whilest the Fates affoord me vitall breath, I will it spend in speaking of thy praise, And sing to thee, untill that timelie death By heavens doome doo ende my earthlie daies: Thereto doo thou my humble spirite raise, And into me that sacred breath inspire, Which thou there breathest perfect and entire. Then will I sing; but who can better sing Than thine owne sister, peerles ladie bright, Which to thee sings with deep harts sorrowing, Sorrowing tempered with deare delight, That her to heare I feele my feeble spright Robbed of sense, and ravished with ioy; O sad ioy, made of mourning and anoy! Yet will I sing; but who can better sing Than thou thyselfe thine owne selfes valiance, That, whilest thou livedst, madest the forrests ring, And fields resownd, and flockes to leap and daunce, And shepheards leave their lambs unto mischaunce, To runne thy shrill Arcadian pipe to heare: O happie were those dayes, thrice happie were! But now more happie thou, and wretched wee, Which want the wonted sweetnes of thy voice, Whiles thou now in Elisian fields so free, With Orpheus, and with Linus, and the choice Of all that ever did in rimes reioyce, Conversest, and doost heare their heavenlie layes, And they heare thine, and thine doo better praise. So there thou livest, singing evermore, And here thou livest, being ever song Of us, which living loved thee afore, And now thee worship mongst that blessed throng Of heavenlie poets and heros strong. So thou both here and there immortall art, And everie where through excellent desart. But such as neither of themselves can sing, Nor yet are sung of others for reward, Die in obscure oblivion, as the thing Which never was; ne ever with regard Their names shall of the later age be heard, But shall in rustic darknes ever lie, Unles they mentiond be with infamie. What booteth it to have been rich alive? What to be great? what to be gracious? When after death no token doth survive Of former being in this mortall hous, But sleepes in dust dead and inglorious, Like beast, whose breath but in his nostrels is, And hath no hope of happinesse or blis. How manie great ones may remembred be, Which in their daies most famouslie did florish, Of whome no word we heare, nor signe now see, But as things wipt out with a sponge to perishe, Because they living cared not to cherishe No gentle wits, through pride or covetize, Which might their names for ever memorize! Provide therefore, ye Princes, whilst ye live, That of the Muses ye may friended bee, Which unto men eternitie do give; For they be daughters of Dame Memorie And love, the father of Eternitie, And do those men in golden thrones repose, Whose merits they to glorifie do chose. The seven-fold yron gates of grislie Hell, And horrid house of sad Proserpina, They able are with power of mightie spell To breake, and thence the soules to bring awaie Out of dread darkenesse to eternall day, And them immortall make which els would die In foule forgetfulnesse, and nameles lie. So whilome raised they the puissant brood Of golden-girt Alcmena, for great merite, Out of the dust to which the Oetaean wood Had him consum'd, and spent his vitall spirite, To highest heaven, where now he doth inherite All happinesse in Hebes silver bowre, Chosen to be her dearest paramoure. So raisde they eke faire Ledaes warlick twinnes. And interchanged life unto them lent, That, when th'one dis, th'other then beginnes To shew in heaven his brightnes orient; And they, for pittie of the sad wayment , Which Orpheus for Eurydice did make, Her back againe to life sent for his sake. So happie are they, and so fortunate, Whom the Pierian sacred sisters love, That freed from bands of impacable fate, And power of death, they live for aye above, Where mortall wreakes their blis may not remove: But with the gods, for former verities meede, On nectar and ambrosia do feede. For deeds doe die, how ever noblie donne, And thoughts of men do as themselves decay; But wise wordes taught in numbers for to runne, Recorded by the Muses, live for ay; Ne may with storming showers be washt away, Ne bitter-breathing windes with harmfull blast, Nor age, nor envie, shall them ever wast. In vaine doo earthly princes then, in vaine, Seeke with pyramides to heaven aspired, Or huge colosses built with costlie paine, Or brasen pillours never to be fired, Or shrines made of the mettall most desired, To make their memories for ever live: For how can mortall immortalitie give? Such one Mausolus made, the worlds great wonder, But now no remnant doth thereof remaine: Such one Marcellus, but was torne with thunder: Such one Lisippus, but is worne with raine: Such one King Edmond, but was rent for gaine. All such vaine moniments of earthlie masse, Devour'd of Time, in time to nought doo passe. But Fame with golden wings aloft doth flie, Above the reach of ruinous decay, And with brave plumes doth beate the azure skie, Admir'd of base-borne men from farre away: Then who so will with vertuous deeds assay To mount to heaven, on Pegasus must ride, And with sweete Poets verse be glorifide. For not to have been dipt in Lethe lake, Could save the sonne of Thetis from to die; But that blinde bard did him immortall make With verses dipt in deaw of Castalie: Which made the Easterne conquerour to crie, O fortunate yong man! whose vertue found So brave a trompe thy noble acts to sound. Therefore in this halfe happie I doo read Good Melibae, that hath a poet got To sing his living praises being dead, Deserving never here to be forgot, In spight of envie, that his deeds would spot: Since whose decease, learning lies unregarded, And men of armes doo wander unrewarded. Those two be those two great calamities, That long agoe did grieve the noble spright Of Salomon with great indignities, Who whilome was alive the wisest wight: But now his wisedome is disprooved quite, For he that now welds all things at his will Scorns th'one and th'other in his deeper skill. O griefe of griefes! O gall of all good heartes! To see that vertue should dispised bee Of him that first was raisde for vertuous parts, And now, broad spreading like an aged tree, Lets none shoot up that nigh him planted bee. O let the man of whom the Muse is scorned, Nor alive nor dead, be of the Muse adorned! O vile worlds trust! that with such vaine illusion Hath so wise men bewitcht and overkest , That they see not the way of their confusion: O vainesse to be added to the rest That do my soule with inward griefe infest! Let them behold the piteous fall of mee, And in my case their owne ensample see. And who so els that sits in highest seate Of this worlds glorie, worshipped of all, Ne feareth change of time, nor fortunes threats, Let him behold the horror of my fall, And his owne end unto remembrance call; That of like ruine he may warned bee, And in himselfe be moov'd to pittie mee. Thus having ended all her piteous plaint, With dolefull shrikes shee vanished away, That I, through inward sorrowe wexen faint, And all astonished with deepe dismay For her departure, had no word to say; But sate long time in sencelesse sad affright, Looking still, if I might of her have sight. Which when I missed, having looked long, My thought returned greeved home againe, Renewing her complaint with passion strong, For ruth of that same womans piteous paine; Whose wordes recording in my troubled braine, I felt such anguish wound my feeble heart, That frosen horror ran through everie part. So inlie greeving in my groning brest, And deepelie muzing at her doubtfull speach, Whose meaning much I labored foorth to wreste, Being above my slender reasons reach, At length, by demonstration me to teach, Before mine eies strange sights presented were, Like tragicke pageants seeming to appeare. I saw an Image, all of massie gold, Placed on high upon an altare faire, That all which did the same from farre beholde Might worship it, and fall on lowest staire. Not that great idoll might with this compaire, To which th'Assyrian tyrant would have made The holie brethren falslie to have praid. But th'altare on the which this image staid Was O great pitie! built of brickle clay, That shortly the foundation decaid, With showres of heaven and tempests worne away; Then downe it fell, and low in ashes lay, Scorned of everie one which by it went; That I, it seing, dearelie did lament. Next unto this a statelie Towre appeared, Built all of richest stone that might bee found, And nigh unto the heavens in height upreared, But placed on a plot of sandie ground: Not that great towre which is so much renownd For tongues confusion in Holie Writ, King Ninus worke, might be compar'd to it. But, O vaine labours of terrestriall wit, That buildes so stronglie on so frayle a soyle, As with each storme does fall away and flit, And gives the fruit of all your travailes toyle To be the pray of Tyme, and Fortunes spoyle, I saw this towre fall sodainlie to dust, That nigh with griefe thereof my heart was brust. Then did I see a pleasant Paradize, Full of sweete flowres and daintiest delights, Such as on earth man could not more devize, With pleasures choyce to feed his cheereful sprights: Not that which Merlin by his magicke slights Made for the gentle Squire, to entertaine His fayre Belphoebe, could this gardine staine. But O short pleasure bought with lasting paine! Why will hereafter anie flesh delight In earthlie blis, and ioy in pleasures vaine? Since that I sawe this gardine wasted quite, That where it was scarce seemed anie sight; That I, which once that beautie did beholde, Could not from teares my melting eyes with-holde. Soone after this a Giaunt came in place, Of wondrous power, and of exceeding stature, That none durst vewe the horror of his face; Yet was he milde of speach, and meeke of nature. Not he which in despight of his Creatour With railing tearmes defied the Iewish hoast, Might with this mightie one in hugenes boast; For from the one he could to th'other coast Stretch his strong thighes, and th'ocean overstride, And reatch his hand into his enemies hoast. But see the end of pompe and fleshlie pride! One of his feete unwares from him did slide, That downe hee fell into the deepe abisse, Where drownd with him is all his earthlie blisse. Then did I see a Bridge, made all of golde, Over the sea from one to other side, Withouten prop or pillour it t'upholde, But like the coloured rainbowe arched wide: Not that great arche which Traian edifide, To be a wonder to all age ensuing, Was matchable to this in equall vewing. But ah! what bootes it to see earthlie thing In glorie or in greatnes to excell, Sith time doth greatest things to ruine bring? This goodlie bridge, one foote not fastned well, Gan faile, and all the rest downe shortlie fell, Ne of so brave a building ought remained, That griefe thereof my spirite greatly pained. I saw two Beares, as white as anie milke, Lying together in a mightie cave, Of milde aspect, and haire as soft as silke, That salvage nature seemed not to have, Nor after greedie spoyle of blood to crave: Two fairer beasts might not elswhere be found, Although the compast world were sought around. But what can long abide above this ground In state of blis, or stedfast happinesse? The cave in which these beares lay sleeping sound Was but earth, and with her owne weightinesse Upon them fell, and did unwares oppresse; That, for great sorrow of their sudden fate, Henceforth all worlds felicitie I hate. Much was I troubled in my heavie spright, At sight of these sad spectacles forepast, That all my senses were bereaved quight, And I in minde remained sore agast, Distraught twixt feare and pitie; when at last I heard a voyce which loudly to me called, That with the suddein shrill I was appalled. Behold, said it, and by ensample see, That all is vanitie and griefe of minde, Ne other comfort in this world can be, But hope of heaven, and heart to God inclinde; For all the rest must needs be left behinde. With that it bad me to the other side To cast mine eye, where other sights I spide. Upon that famous rivers further shore, There stood a snowie Swan, of heavenly hiew And gentle kinde as ever fowle afore; A fairer one in all the goodlie criew Of white Strimonian brood might no man view: There he most sweetly sung the prophecie Of his owne death in dolefull elegie. At last, when all his mourning melodie He ended had, that both the shores resounded, Feeling the fit that him forewarnd to die, With loftie flight above the earth he bounded, And out of sight to highest heaven mounted, Where now he is become an heavenly signe; There now the ioy is his, here sorrow mine. Whilest thus I looked, loe! adowne the lee I sawe an Harpe, stroong all with silver twyne, And made of golde and costlie yvorie, Swimming, that whilome seemed to have been The harpe on which Dan Orpheus was seene Wylde beasts and forrests after him to lead, But was th'harpe of Philisides now dead. At length out of the river it was reard, And borne above the cloudes to be divin'd, Whilst all the way most heavenly noyse was heard Of the strings, stirred with the warbling wind, That wrought both ioy and sorrow in my mind: So now in heaven a signe it doth appeare, The Harpe well knowne beside the Northern Beare. Soone after this I saw on th'other side A curious Coffer made of heben wood, That in it did most precious treasure hide, Exceeding all this baser worlds good: Yet through the overflowing of the flood It almost drowned was and done to nought, That sight thereof much griev'd my pensive thought. At length, when most in perill it was brought, Two angels, downe descending with swift flight, Out of the swelling streame it lightly caught, And twixt their blessed armes it carried quight Above the reach of anie living sight: So now it is transform'd into that starre, In which all heavenly treasures locked are. Looking aside I saw a stately Bed, Adorned all with costly cloth of gold, That might for anie princes couche be red , And deckt with daintie flowres, as if it shold Be for some bride, her ioyous night to hold: Therein a goodly virgine sleeping lay; A fairer wight saw never summers day. I heard a voyce that called farre away, And her awaking bad her quickly dight, For lo! her bridegrome was in readie ray To come to her, and seeke her loves delight: With that she started up with cherefull sight, When suddeinly both bed and all was gone, And I in languor left there all alone. Still as I gazed, I beheld where stood A Knight all arm'd, upon a winged steed, The same that was bred of Medusaes blood, On which Dan Perseus, borne of heavenly seed, The faire Andromeda from perill freed: Full mortally this knight ywounded was, That streames of blood foorth flowed on the gras. Yet was he deckt small ioy to him, alas! With manie garlands for his victories, And with rich spoyles, which late he did purchas Through brave atcheivements from his enemies: Fainting at last through long infirmities, He smote his steed, that straight to heaven him bore, And left me here his losse for to deplore. Lastly, I saw an Arke of purest golde Upon a brazen pillour standing hie, Which th'ashes seem'd of some great prince to hold, Enclosde therein for endles memorie Of him whom all the world did glorifie: Seemed the heavens with the earth did disagree, Whether should of those ashes keeper bee. At last me seem'd wing-footed Mercurie, From heaven descending to appease their strife, The arke did beare with him above the skie, And to those ashes gave a second life, To live in heaven, where happines is rife: At which the earth did grieve exceedingly, And I for dole was almost like to die. Immortall spirite of Philisides, Which now art made the heavens ornament, That whilome wast the worlds chiefst riches. Give leave to him that lov'de thee to lament His losse by lacke of thee to heaven hent , And with last duties of this broken verse, Broken with sighes, to decke thy sable herse! And ye, faire Ladie! th'honor of your daies And glorie of the world, your high thoughts scorne, Vouchsafe this moniment of his last praise With some few silver dropping teares t'adorne; And as ye be of heavenlie off-spring borne, So unto heaven let your high minde aspire, And loath this drosse of sinfull worlds desire. Rehearse to me, ye sacred Sisters nine, The golden brood of great Apolloes wit, Those piteous plaints and sorowfull sad tine Which late ye powred forth as ye did sit Beside the silver springs of Helicone, Making your musick of hart-breaking mone! For since the time that Phoebus foolish sonne, Ythundered, through loves avengefull wrath, For traversing the charret of the Sunne Beyond the compasse of his pointed path, Of you, his mournfull sisters, was lamented, Such mournfull tunes were never since invented. Nor since that faire Calliope did lose Her loved twinnes, the dearlings of her ioy, Her Palici, whom her unkindly foes, The Fatall Sisters, did for spight destroy, Whom all the Muses did bewaile long space, Was ever heard such wayling in this place. For all their groves, which with the heavenly noyses Of their sweete instruments were wont to sound, And th'hollow hills, from which their silver voyces Were wont redoubled echoes to rebound, Did now rebound with nought but rufull cries, And yelling shrieks throwne up into the skies. The trembling streames which wont in chanels cleare To romble gently downe with murmur soft, And were by them right tunefull taught to beare A bases part amongst their consorts oft; Now forst to overflowe with brackish teares, With troublous noyse did dull their daintie eares. The ioyous Nymphes and lightfoote Faries Which thether came to heare their musick sweet, And to the measure of their melodies Did learne to move their nimble-shifting feete, Now hearing them so heavily lament, Like heavily lamenting from them went. And all that els was wont to worke delight Through the divine infusion of their skill, And all that els seemd faire and fresh in sight, So made by nature for to serve their will, Was turned now to dismall heavinesse, Was turned now to dreadfull uglinesse. Ay me! what thing on earth, that all thing breeds, Might be the cause of so impatient plight? What furie, or what feend, with felon deeds Hath stirred up so mischievous despight? Can griefe then enter into heavenly harts, And pierce immortall breasts with mortall smarts? Vouchsafe ye then, whom onely it concernes, To me those secret causes to display; For none but you, or who of you it learnes, Can rightfully aread so dolefull lay. Begin, thou eldest sister of the crew, And let the rest in order thee ensew. Heare, thou great Father of the Gods on hie, That most art dreaded for thy thunder darts; And thou, our Syre? that raignst in Castalie And Mount Parnasse, the god of goodly arts: Heare, and behold the miserable state Of us thy daughters, dolefull desolate. Behold the fowle reproach and open shame The which is day by day unto us wrought By such as hate the honour of our name, The foes of learning and each gentle thought; They, not contented us themselves to scorne, Doo seeke to make us of the world forlorne . Ne onely they that dwell in lowly dust, The sonnes of darknes and of ignoraunce; But they whom thou, great love, by doome uniust Didst to the type of honour earst advaunce; They now, puft up with sdeignfull insolence, Despise the brood of blessed Sapience. The sectaries of my celestiall skill, That wont to be the worlds chiefe ornament, And learned impes that wont to shoote up still, And grow to hight of kingdomes government, They underkeep, and with their spredding armes Doo beat their buds, that perish through their harmes. It most behoves the honorable race Of mightie peeres true wisedome to sustaine, And with their noble countenaunce to grace The learned forheads, without gifts or game: Or rather learnd themselves behoves to bee; That is the girlond of nobilitie. But ah! all otherwise they doo esteeme Of th'heavenly gift of wisdomes influence, And to be learned it a base thing deeme: Base minded they that want intelligence; For God himselfe for wisedome most is praised, And men to God thereby are nighest raised. But they doo onely strive themselves to raise Through pompous pride, and foolish vanitie; In th'eyes of people they put all their praise, And onely boast of armes and auncestrie: But vertuous deeds, which did those armes first give To their grandsyres, they care not to atchive. So I, that doo all noble feates professe To register and sound in trump of gold, Through their bad dooings, or base slothfulnesse, Finde nothing worthie to be writ, or told: For better farre it were to hide their names, Than telling them to blazon out their blames. So shall succeeding ages have no light Of things forepast, nor moniments of time; And all that in this world is worthie hight Shall die in darknesse, and lie hid in slime! Therefore I mourne with deep harts sorrowing, Because I nothing noble have to sing. With that she raynd such store of streaming teares, That could have made a stonie heart to weep; And all her sisters rent their golden heares, And their faire faces with salt humour steep. So ended shee: and then the next anew Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew. O, who shall powre into my swollen eyes A sea of teares that never may be dryde, A brasen voice that may with shrilling cryes Pierce the dull heavens and fill the ayr wide, And yron sides that sighing may endure, To waile the wretchednes of world impure! Ah, wretched world! the den of wickednesse, Deformd with filth and fowle iniquitie; Ah, wretched world! the house of heavinesse, Fild with the wreaks of mortall miserie; Ah, wretched world, and all that is therein! The vassals of Gods wrath, and slaves of sin. Most miserable creature under sky Man without understanding doth appeare; For all this worlds affliction he thereby, And fortunes freakes, is wisely taught to beare: Of wretched life the onely ioy shee is. And th'only comfort in calamities. She armes the brest with constant patience Against the bitter throwes of dolours darts: She solaceth with rules of sapience The gentle minds, in midst of worldlie smarts: When he is sad, shee seeks to make him merie, And doth refresh his sprights when they be werie. But he that is of reasons skill bereft, And wants the staffe of wisedome him to stay, Is like a ship in midst of tempest left Withouten helme or pilot her to sway: Full sad and dreadfull is that ships event; So is the man that wants intendiment . Whie then doo foolish men so much despize The precious store of this celestiall riches? Why doo they banish us, that patronize The name of learning? Most unhappie wretches! The which lie drowned in deep wretchednes, Yet doo not see their owne unhappines. My part it is and my professed skill The stage with tragick buskin to adorne, And fill the scene with plaint and outcries shrill Of wretched persons, to misfortune borne: But none more tragick matter I can finde Than this, of men depriv'd of sense and minde. For all mans life me seemes a tragedy, Full of sad sights and sore catastrophees; First comming to the world with weeping eye, Where all his dayes, like dolorous trophees, Are heapt with spoyles of fortune and of feare, And he at last laid forth on balefull beare. So all with rufull spectacles is fild, But I that in true tragedies am skild, The flowre of wit, finde nought to busie me: Therefore I mourne, and pitifully mone, Because that mourning matter I have none. Then gan she wofully to waile, and wring Her wretched hands in lamentable wise; And all her sisters, thereto answering, Threw forth lowd shrieks and drerie dolefull cries. So rested she: and then the next in rew Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew. Where be the sweete delights of learnings treasure, That wont with comick sock to beautefie The painted theaters, and fill with pleasure The listners eyes, and eares with melodie, In which I late was wont to raine as queene, And maske in mirth with graces well beseene? O, all is gone! and all that goodly glee, Which wont to be the glorie of gay wits, Is layd abed, and no where now to see; And in her roome unseemly Sorrow sits, With hollow browes and greisly countenaunce Marring my ioyous gentle dalliaunce. And him beside sits ugly Barbarisme, And brutish Ignorance, ycrept of late Out of dredd darknes of the deep abysme, Where being bredd, he light and heaven does hate: They in the mindes of men now tyrannize, And the faire scene with rudenes foule disguize. All places they with follie have possest, And with vaine toyes the vulgare entertaine; But me have banished, with all the rest That whilome wont to wait upon my traine, Fine Counterfesaunce , and unhurtfull Sport, Delight, and Laughter, deckt in seemly sort. All these, and all that els the comick stage With seasoned wit and goodly pleasance graced, By which mans life in his likest imge Was limned forth, are wholly now defaced; And those sweete wits which wont the like to frame Are now despizd, and made a laughing game. And he, the man whom Nature selfe had made To mock her selfe, and truth to imitate, With kindly counter under mimick shade, Our pleasant Willy, ah! is dead of late: With whom all ioy and iolly meriment Is also deaded, and in dolour drent . In stead thereof scoffing Scurrilitie, And scornfull Follie with Contempt is crept, Rolling in rymes of shameles ribaudrie Without regard, or due decorum kept; Each idle wit at will presumes to make , And doth the learneds taske upon him take. But that same gentle spirit, from whose pen Large streames of honnie and sweete nectar flowe, Scorning the boldnes of such base-borne men, Which dare their follies forth so rashlie throwe, Doth rather choose to sit in idle cell, Than so himselfe to mockerie to sell. So am I made the servant of the manie, And laughing stocke of all that list to scorne, Not honored nor cared for of anie, But loath'd of losels as a thing forlorne: Therefore I mourne and sorrow with the rest, Untill my cause of sorrow be redrest. Therewith she lowdly did lament and shrike, Pouring forth streames of teares abundantly; And all her sisters, with compassion like, The breaches of her singulfs did supply. So rested shee: and then the next in rew Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew. Like as the dearling of the summers pryde, Faire Philomele, when winters stormie wrath The goodly fields, that earst so gay were dyde In colours divers, quite despoyled hath, All comfortlesse doth hide her chearlesse head During the time of that her widowhead, So we, that earst were wont in sweet accord All places with our pleasant notes to fill, Whilest favourable times did us afford Free libertie to chaunt our charmes at will, All comfortlesse upon the bared bow , Like wofull culvers , doo sit wayling now. For far more bitter storme than winters stowre The beautie of the world hath lately wasted, And those fresh buds, which wont so faire to flowre, Hath marred quite, and all their blossoms blasted; And those yong plants, which wont with fruit t'abound, Now without fruite or leaves are to be found. A stonie coldnesse hath benumbd the sence And livelie spirits of each living wight, And dimd with darknesse their intelligence, Darknesse more than Cymerians daylie night: And monstrous Error, flying in the ayre, Hath mard the face of all that semed fayre. Image of hellish horrour, Ignorance, Borne in the bosome of the black abysse, And fed with Furies milke for sustenaunce Of his weake infancie, begot amisse By yawning Sloth on his owne mother Night, So hee his sonnes both syre and brother hight, He, armd with blindnesse and with boldnes stout, For blind is bold, hath our fayre light defaced; And, gathering unto him a ragged rout Of Faunes and Satyres, hath our dwellings raced , And our chast bowers, in which all vertue rained, With brutishnesse and beastlie filth hath stained. The sacred springs of horsefoot Helicon, So oft bedeawed with our learned layes, And speaking streames of pure Castalion, The famous witnesse of our wonted praise, They trampled have with their fowle footings trade , And like to troubled puddles have them made. Our pleasant groves, which planted were with paines, That with our musick wont so oft to ring, And arbors sweet, in which the shepheards swaines Were wont so oft their pastoralls to sing, They have cut downe, and all their pleasaunce mard, That now no pastorall is to bee hard. In stead of them, fowle goblins and shriek-owles With fearfull howling do all places fill, And feeble eccho now laments and howles, The dreadfull accents of their outcries shrill. So all is turned into wildernesse, Whilest Ignorance the Muses doth oppresse. And I, whose ioy was earst with spirit full To teach the warbling pipe to sound aloft, My spirits now dismayd with sorrow dull, Doo mone my miserie in silence soft. Therefore I mourne and waile incessantly, Till please the heavens affoord me remedy. Therewith shee wayled with exceeding woe, And pitious lamentation did make; And all her sisters, seeing her doo soe, With equall plaints her sorrowe did partake. So rested shee: and then the next in rew Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew. Whoso hath in the lap of soft delight Beene long time luld, and fed with pleasures sweet, Feareles through his own fault or Fortunes spight To tumble into sorrow and regreet, Yf chaunce him fall into calamitie, Findes greater burthen of his miserie. So wee, that earst in ioyance did abound, And in the bosome of all blis did sit, Like virgin queenes, with laurell garlands cround, For vertues meed and ornament of wit, Sith Ignorance our kingdome did confound, Bee now become most wretched wightes on ground. And in our royall thrones, which lately stood In th'hearts of men to rule them carefully, He now hath placed his accursed brood, By him begotten of fowle Infamy; Blind Error, scornefull Follie, and base Spight, Who hold by wrong that wee should have by right. They to the vulgar sort now pipe and sing, And make them merrie with their fooleries; They cherelie chaunt, and rymes at randon fling, The fruitfull spawne of their ranke fantasies; They feede the eares of fooles with flattery, And good men blame, and losels magnify. All places they doo with their toyes possesse, And raigne in liking of the multitude; The schooles they till with fond newfanglenesse, And sway in court with pride and rashnes rude; Mongst simple shepheards they do boast their skill, And say their musicke matcheth Phoebus quill. The noble hearts to pleasures they allure, And tell their Prince that learning is but vaine; Faire ladies loves they spot with thoughts impure, And gentle mindes with lewd delights distaine; Clerks they to loathly idlenes entice, And fill their bookes with discipline of vice. So every where they rule and tyrannize, For their usurped kingdomes maintenaunce, The whiles we silly maides, whom they dispize And with reprochfull scorne discountenaunce, From our owne native heritage exilde, Walk through the world of every one revilde. Nor anie one doth care to call us in, Or once vouchsafeth us to entertaine, Unlesse some one perhaps of gentle kin, For pitties sake, compassion our paine, And yeeld us some reliefe in this distresse; Yet to be so reliev'd is wretchednesse. So wander we all carefull comfortlesse, Yet none cloth care to comfort us at all; So seeke we helpe our sorrow to redresse, Yet none vouchsafes to answere to our call; Therefore we mourne and pittilesse complaine, Because none living pittieth our paine. With that she wept and wofullie waymented, That naught on earth her griefe might pacifie; And all the rest her dolefull din augmented With shrikes, and groanes, and grievous agonie. So ended shee: and then the next in rew Began her piteous plaint, as doth ensew. Ye gentle Spirits breathing from above, Where ye in Venus silver bowre were bred, Thoughts halfe devine, full of the fire of love, With beawtie kindled, and with pleasure fed, Which ye now in securitie possesse, Forgetfull of your former heavinesse, Now change the tenor of your ioyous layes, With which ye use your loves to deifie, And blazon foorth an earthlie beauties praise Above the compasse of the arched skie: Now change your praises into piteous cries, And eulogies turne into elegies. Such as ye wont, whenas those bitter stounds Of raging love first gan you to torment, And launch your hearts with lamentable wounds Of secret sorrow and sad languishment, Before your loves did take you unto grace; Those now renew, as fitter for this place. For I that rule in measure moderate The tempest of that stormie passion, And use to paint in rimes the troublous state Of lovers life in likest fashion, Am put from practise of my kindlie skill, Banisht by those that love with leawdnes fill. Love wont to be schoolmaster of my skill, And the devicefull matter of my song; Sweete love devoyd of villanie or ill, But pure and spotles, as at first he sprong Out of th'Almighties bosome, where he nests; From thence infused into mortall brests. Such high conceipt of that celestiall fire, The base-borne brood of Blindnes cannot gesse, Ne ever dare their dunghill thoughts aspire Unto so loftie pitch of perfectnesse, But rime at riot, and doo rage in love, Yet little wote what doth thereto behove. Faire Cytheree, the mother of delight And queene of beautie, now thou maist go pack; For lo! thy kingdoms is defaced quight, Thy scepter rent, and power put to wrack; And thy gay sonne, that winged God of Love, May now goe prune his plumes like ruffed dove. And ye three twins, to light by Venus brought, The sweete companions of the Muses late, From whom whatever thing is goodly thought Doth borrow grace, the fancie to aggrate , Go beg with us, and be companions still, As heretofore of good, so now of ill. For neither you nor we shall anie more Finde entertainment or in court or schoole: For that which was accounted heretofore The learneds meed is now lent to the foole; He sings of love and maketh loving layes, And they him heare, and they him highly prayse. With that she powred foorth a brackish flood Of bitter teares, and made exceeding mone; And all her sisters, seeing her sad mood, With lowd laments her answered all at one. So ended she: and then the next in rew Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew. To whom shall I my evill case complaine, Or tell the anguish of my inward smart, Sith none is left to remedie my paine, Or deignes to pitie a perplexed hart; But rather seekes my sorrow to augment With fowle reproach, and cruell banishment? For they to whom I used to applie The faithfull service of my learned skill, The goodly off-spring of loves progenie, That wont the world with famous acts to fill, Whose living praises in heroick style, It is my chiefe profession to compyle, They, all corrupted through the rust of time, That doth all fairest things on earth deface, Or through unnoble sloth, or sinfull crime, That doth degenerate the noble race, Have both desire of worthie deeds forlorne, And name of learning utterly doo scorne. Ne doo they care to have the auncestrie Of th'old heroes memorizde anew; Ne doo they care that late posteritie Should know their names, or speak their praises dew, But die, forgot from whence at first they sprong, As they themselves shalbe forgot ere long. What bootes it then to come from glorious Forefathers, or to have been nobly bredd? What oddes twixt Irus and old Inachus, Twixt best and worst, when both alike are dedd, If none of neither mention should make, Nor out of dust their memories awake? Or who would ever care to doo brave deed, Or strive in vertue others to excell, If none should yeeld him his deserved meed, Due praise, that is the spur of doing well? For if good were not praised more than ill, None would choose goodnes of his owne freewill. Therefore the nurse of vertue I am hight, And golden trompet of eternitie, That lowly thoughts lift up to heavens hight, And mortall men have powre to deifie: Bacchus and Hercules I raisd to heaven, And Charlemaine amongst the starris seaven. But now I will my golden clarion rend, And will henceforth immortalize no more, Sith I no more finde worthie to commend For prize of value, or for learned lore: For noble peeres, whom I was wont to raise, Now onely seeke for pleasure, nought for praise. Their great revenues all in sumptuous pride They spend, that nought to learning they may spare; And the rich fee which poets wont divide Now parasites and sycophants doo share: Therefore I mourne and endlesse sorrow make, Both for my selfe and for my sisters sake. With that she lowdly gan to waile and shrike, And from her eyes a sea of teares did powre; And all her sisters, with compassion like, Did more increase the sharpnes of her showre. So ended she: and then the next in rew Began her plaint, as doth herein ensew. What wrath of gods, or wicked influence Of starres conspiring wretched men t'afflict, Hath powrd on earth this noyous pestilence, That mortall mindes doth inwardly infect With love of blindnesse and of ignorance, To dwell in darkenesse without sovenance? What difference twixt man and beast is left, When th'heavenlie light of knowledge is put out, And th'ornaments of wisdome are bereft? Then wandreth he in error and in doubt, Unweeting of the danger hee is in, Through fleshes frailtie and deceipt of sin. In this wide world in which they wretches stray, It is the onelie comfort which they have, It is their light, their loadstarre, and their day; But hell, and darkenesse, and the grislie grave, Is Ignorance, the enemie of Grace, That mindes of men borne heavenlie doth debace. Through knowledge we behold the worlds creation, How in his cradle first he fostred was; And iudge of Natures cunning operation, How things she formed of a formelesse mas: By knowledge wee do learne our selves to knowe, And what to man, and what to God, wee owe. From hence wee mount aloft unto the skie, And looke into the christall firmament; There we behold the heavens great hierarchie, The starres pure light, the spheres swift movment, The spirites and intelligences fayre, And angels waighting on th'Almighties chayre. And there, with humble minde and high insight, Th'eternall Makers maiestie wee viewe, His love, his truth, his glorie, and his might, And mercie more than mortall men can vew. O soveraigne Lord, O soveraigne happinesse, To see thee, and thy mercie measurelesse! Such happines have they that doo embrace The precepts of my heavenlie discipline; But shame and sorrow and accursed case Have they that scorne the schoole of arts divine, And banish me, which do professe the skill To make men heavenly wise through humbled will. However yet they mee despise and spight, I feede on sweet contentment of my thought, And please my selfe with mine owne self-delight, In contemplation of things heavenlie wrought: So, loathing earth, I looke up to the sky, And being driven hence, I thether fly. Thence I behold the miserie of men, Which want the blis that wisedom would them breed. And like brute beasts doo lie in loathsome den Of ghostly darkenes and of gastlie dreed: For whom I mourne, and for my selfe complaine, And for my sisters eake whom they disdaine. With that shee wept and waild so pityouslie, As if her eyes had beene two springing wells; And all the rest, her sorrow to supplie, Did throw forth shrieks and cries and dreery yells. So ended shee: and then the next in rew Began her mournfull plaint, as doth ensew. A dolefull case desires a dolefull song, Without vaine art or curious complements; And squallid Fortune, into basenes flong, Doth scorne the pride of wonted ornaments. Then fittest are these ragged rimes for mee, To tell my sorrowes that exceeding bee. For the sweet numbers and melodious measures With which I wont the winged words to tie, And make a tunefull diapase of pleasures, Now being let to runne at libertie By those which have no skill to rule them right, Have now quite lost their naturall delight. Heapes of huge words uphoorded hideously, With horrid sound, though having little sence, They thinke to be chiefe praise of poetry; And, thereby wanting due intelligence, Have mard the face of goodly poesie, And made a monster of their fantasie. Whilom in ages past none might professe But princes and high priests that secret skill; The sacred lawes therein they wont expresse, And with deepe oracles their verses fill: Then was shee held in soveraigne dignitie, And made the noursling of nobilitie. But now nor prince nor priest doth her maintayne, But suffer her prophaned for to bee Of the base vulgar, that with hands uncleane Dares to pollute her hidden mysterie; And treadeth under foote hir holie things, Which was the care of kesars and of kings. One onelie lives, her ages ornament, And myrrour of her Makers maiestie, That with rich bountie and deare cherishment Supports the praise of noble poesie; Ne onelie favours them which it professe, But is her selfe a peereles poetresse. Most peereles Prince, most peereles Poetresse, The true Pandora of all heavenly graces, Divine Elisa, sacred Emperesse! Live she for ever, and her royall p'laces Be fild with praises of divinest wits, That her eternize with their heavenlie writs! Some few beside this sacred skill esteme, Admirers of her glorious excellence; Which, being lightned with her beawties beme, Are thereby fild with happie influence, And lifted up above the worlds gaze, To sing with angels her immortall praize. But all the rest, as borne of salvage brood, And having beene with acorns alwaies fed, Can no whit savour this celestiall food, But with base thoughts are into blindnesse led, And kept from looking on the lightsome day: For whome I waile and weepe all that I may. Eftsoones such store of teares shee forth did powre, As if shee all to water would have gone; And all her sisters, seeing her sad stowre , Did weep and waile, and made exceeding mone, And all their learned instruments did breake: The rest untold no living tongue can speake. Wrong'd, yet not daring to expresse my paine, To you, great Lord, the causer of my care, In clowdie teares my case I thus complaine Unto your selfe, that onely privie are. But if that any Oedipus unware Shall chaunce, through power of some divining spright, To reade the secrete of this riddle rare, And know the purporte of my evill plight, Let him rest pleased with his owne insight, Ne further seeke to glose upon the text: For griefe enough it is to grieved wight To feele his fault, and not be further vext. But what so by my selfe may not be showen, May by this Gnatts complaint be easily knowen . Leicester's displeasure was incurred for some kind of officious We now have playde, Augustus, wantonly, Tuning our song unto a tender Muse, And, like a cobweb weaving slenderly, Have onely playde: let thus much then excuse This Gnats small poeme, that th'whole history Is but a iest; though envie it abuse: But who such sports and sweet delights doth blame, Shall lighter seeme than this Gnats idle name. Hereafter, when as season more secure Shall bring forth fruit, this Muse shall speak to thee In bigger notes, that may thy sense allure, And for thy worth frame some fit poesie: The golden ofspring of Latona pure, And ornament of great Ioves progenie, Phoebus, shall be the author of my song, Playing on yvorie harp with silver strong . He shall inspire my verse with gentle mood, Of poets prince, whether he woon beside Faire Xanthus sprincled with Chimaeras blood, Or in the woods of Astery abide, Or whereas Mount Parnasse, the Muses brood, Doth his broad forhead like two hornes divide, And the sweete waves of sounding Castaly With liquid foote doth slide downe easily. Wherefore ye Sisters, which the glorie bee Of the Pierian streames, fayre Naiades, Go too, and dauncing all in companie, Adorne that god: and thou holie Pales, To whome the honest care of husbandrie Returneth by continuall successe, Have care for to pursue his footing light Throgh the wide woods and groves with green leaves dight. Professing thee I lifted am aloft Betwixt the forrest wide and starrie sky: And thou, most dread Octavius, which oft To learned wits givest courage worthily, O come, thou sacred childe, come sliding soft, And favour my beginnings graciously: For not these leaves do sing that dreadfull stound , When giants bloud did staine Phlegraean ground; Nor how th'halfe-horsy people, Centaures hight, Fought with the bloudie Lapithaes at bord; Nor how the East with tyranous despight Burnt th'Attick towres, and people slew with sword; Nor how Mount Athos through exceeding might Was digged downe; nor yron bands abord The Pontick sea by their huge navy cast, My volume shall renowne, so long since past. Nor Hellespont trampled with horses feete, When flocking Persians did the Greeks affray: But my soft Muse, as for her power more meete, Delights with Phoebus friendly leave to play An easie running verse with tender feete. And thou, dread sacred child, to thee alway Let everlasting lightsome glory strive, Through the worlds endles ages to survive. And let an happie roome remaine for thee Mongst heavenly ranks, where blessed soules do rest; And let long lasting life with ioyous glee, As thy due meede that thou deservest best, Hereafter many yeares remembred be Amongst good men, of whom thou oft are blest. Live thou for ever in all happinesse! But let us turne to our first businesse. The fiery Sun was mounted now on Light Up to the heavenly towers, and shot each where Out of his golden charet glistering light; And fayre Aurora, with her rosie heare, The hatefull darknes now had put to flight; When as the Shepheard, seeing day appeare, His little goats gan drive out of their stalls, To feede abroad, where pasture best befalls. To an high mountaines top he with them went, Where thickest grasse did cloath the open hills: They, now amongst the woods and thickets ment Now in the valleies wandring at their wills, Spread themselves farre abroad through each descent; Some on the soft greene grasse feeding their fills, Some, clambring through the hollow cliffes on hy, Nibble the bushie shrubs which growe thereby. Others the utmost boughs of trees doe crop, And brouze the woodbine twigges that freshly bud; This with full bit doth catch the utmost top Of some soft willow, or new growen stud ; This with sharpe teeth the bramble leaves doth lop, And chaw the tender prickles in her cud; The whiles another high doth overlooke Her owne like image in a christall brooke. O the great happines which shepheards have, Who so loathes not too much the poore estate With minde that ill use doth before deprave, Ne measures all things by the costly rate Of riotise, and semblants outward brave! No such sad cares, as wont to macerate And rend the greedie mindes of covetous men, Do ever creepe into the shepheards den. Ne cares he if the fleece which him arayes Be not twice steeped in Assyrian dye; Ne glistering of golde, which underlayes The summer beames, doe blinde his gazing eye; Ne pictures beautie, nor the glauncing rayes Of precious stones, whence no good commeth by; Ne yet his cup embost with imagery Of Baetus or of Alcons vanity. Ne ought the whelky pearles esteemeth hee, Which are from Indian seas brought far away: But with pure brest, from carefull sorrow free, On the soft grasse his limbs doth oft display, In sweete spring time, when flowres varietie With sundrie colours paints the sprincled lay ; There, lying all at ease from guile or spight, With pype of fennie reedes doth him delight. There he, lord of himselfe, with palme bedight, His looser locks doth wrap in wreath of vine: There his milk-dropping goats be his delight, And fruitefull Pales, and the forrest greene, And darkesome caves in pleasaunt vallies pight , Wheras continuall shade is to be seene, And where fresh springing wells, as christall neate, Do alwayes flow, to quench his thirstie heate. O! who can lead then a more happie life Than he, that with cleane minde and heart sincere, No greedy riches knowes nor bloudie strife, No deadly fight of warlick fleete doth feare, Ne runs in perill of foes cruell knife, That in the sacred temples he may reare A trophee of his glittering spoyles and treasure, Or may abound in riches above measure. Of him his God is worshipt with his sythe, And not with skill of craftsman polished: He ioyes in groves, and makes himselfe full blythe With sundrie flowers in wilde fieldes gathered, Ne frankincens he from Panchaea buyth: Sweete Quiet harbours in his harmeles head, And perfect Pleasure buildes her ioyous bowre, Free from sad cares, that rich mens hearts devowre. This all his care, this all his whole indevour, To this his minde and senses he doth bend, How he may flow in quiets matchles treasour, Content with any food that God doth send; And how his limbs, resolv'd through idle leisour, Unto sweete sleepe he may securely lend, In some coole shadow from the scorching heat, The whiles his flock their chawed cuds do eate. O Flocks, O Faunes, and O ye pleasaunt Springs Of Tempe, where the countrey nymphs are rife, Through whose not costly care each shepheard sings As merrie notes upon his rusticke fife As that Ascraean bard , whose fame now rings Through the wide world, and leads as ioyfull life; Free from all troubles and from worldly toyle, In which fond men doe all their dayes turmoyle. In such delights whilst thus his carelesse time This shepheard drives, upleaning on his batt , And on shrill reedes chaunting his rustick rime, Hyperion, throwing foorth his beames full hott, Into the highest top of heaven gan clime, And the world parting by an equall lott, Did shed his whirling flames on either side, As the great Ocean doth himselfe divide. Then gan the shepheard gather into one His stragling goates, and drave them to a foord, Whose caerule streame, rombling in pible stone, Crept under mosse as greene as any goord. Now had the sun halfe heaven overgone, When he his heard back from that water foord Drave, from the force of Phoebus boyling ray, Into thick shadowes, there themselves to lay. Soone as he them plac'd in thy sacred wood, O Delian goddesse, saw, to which of yore Came the bad daughter of old Cadmus brood, Cruell Agav, flying vengeance sore Of King Nictileus for the guiltie blood Which she with cursed hands had shed before; There she halfe frantick, having slaine her sonne, Did shrowd her selfe like punishment to shonne. Here also playing on the grassy greene, Woodgods, and Satyres, and swift Dryades, With many Fairies oft were dauncing seene. Not so much did Dan Orpheus represse The streames of Hebrus with his songs, I weene, As that faire troupe of woodie goddesses Staied thee, O Peneus, powring foorth to thee, From cheereful lookes, great mirth and gladsome glee. The verie nature of the place, resounding With gentle murmure of the breathing ayre, A pleasant bowre with all delight abounding In the fresh shadowe did for them prepayre, To rest their limbs with wearines redounding. For first the high palme-trees, with braunches faire, Out of the lowly vallies did arise, And high shoote up their heads into the skyes. And them amongst the wicked lotos grew, Wicked, for holding guilefully away Ulysses men, whom rapt with sweetenes new, Taking to hoste , it quite from him did stay; And eke those trees, in whose transformed hew The Sunnes sad daughters waylde the rash decay Of Phaton, whose limbs with lightening rent They gathering up, with sweete teares did lament. And that same tree , in which Demophoon, By his disloyalty lamented sore, Eternall hurte left unto many one: Whom als accompanied the oke, of yore Through fatall charmes transferred to such an one: The oke, whose acornes were our foode before That Ceres seede of mortall men were knowne, Which first Triptoleme taught how to be sowne. Here also grew the rougher-rinded pine, The great Argoan ships brave ornament, Whom golden fleece did make an heavenly signe; Which coveting, with his high tops extent, To make the mountaines touch the starres divine, Decks all the forrest with embellishment; And the blacke holme that loves the watrie vale; And the sweete cypresse, signe of deadly bale. Emongst the rest the clambring yvie grew, Knitting his wanton armes with grasping hold, Least that the poplar happely should rew Her brothers strokes, whose boughes she doth enfold With her lythe twigs, till they the top survew, And paint with pallid greene her buds of gold. Next did the myrtle tree to her approach, Not yet unmindfull of her olde reproach. But the small birds in their wide boughs embowring Chaunted their sundrie tunes with sweete consent; And under them a silver spring, forth powring His trickling streames, a gentle murmure sent; Thereto the frogs, bred in the slimie scowring Of the moist moores, their iarring voyces bent; And shrill grashoppers chirped them around: All which the ayrie echo did resound. In this so pleasant place the shepheards flocke Lay everie where, their wearie limbs to rest, On everie bush, and everie hollow rocke, Where breathe on them the whistling wind mote best; The whiles the shepheard self, tending his stocke, Sate by the fountaine side, in shade to rest, Where gentle slumbring sleep oppressed him Displaid on ground, and seized everie lim. Of trecherie or traines nought tooke he keep, But, looslie on the grassie greene dispredd, His dearest life did trust to careles sleep; Which, weighing down his drouping drowsie hedd, In quiet rest his molten heart did steep, Devoid of care, and feare of all falshedd: Had not inconstant Fortune, bent to ill, Bid strange mischance his quietnes to spill. For at his wonted time in that same place An huge great Serpent, all with speckles pide, To drench himselfe in moorish slime did trace, There from the boyling heate himselfe to hide: He, passing by with rolling wreathed pace, With brandisht tongue the emptie aire did gride , And wrapt his scalie boughts with fell despight, That all things seem'd appalled at his sight. Now more and more having himselfe enrolde, His glittering breast he lifteth up on hie, And with proud vaunt his head aloft doth holde; His creste above, spotted with purple die, On everie side did shine like scalie golde; And his bright eyes, glauncing full dreadfullie, Did seeme to flame out flakes of flashing fyre, And with sterne lookes to threaten kindled yre. Thus wise long time he did himselfe dispace There round about, when as at last he spide, Lying along before him in that place, That flocks grand captaine and most trustie guide: Eftsoones more fierce in visage and in pace, Throwing his firie eyes on everie side, He commeth on, and all things in his way Full stearnly rends that might his passage stay. Much he disdaines that anie one should dare To come unto his haunt; for which intent He inly burns, and gins straight to prepare The weapons which Nature to him hath lent; Fellie he hisseth, and doth fiercely stare, And hath his iawes with angrie spirits rent, That all his tract with bloudie drops is stained, And all his foldes are now in length outstrained. Whom, thus at point prepared, to prevent, A litle noursling of the humid ayre, A Gnat, unto the sleepie shepheard went, And marking where his ey-lids twinckling rare Shewd the two pearles which sight unto him lent, Through their thin coverings appearing fayre His little needle there infixing deep, Warnd him awake, from death himselfe to keep. Wherewith enrag'd, he fiercely gan upstart, And with his hand him rashly bruzing slewe As in avengement of his heedles smart, That streight the spirite out of his senses flew. And life out of his members did depart: When, suddenly casting aside his vew, He spide his foe with felonous intent, And fervent eyes to his destruction bent. All suddenly dismaid, and hartles quight, He fled abacke, and, catching hastie holde Of a yong alder hard beside him pight, It rent, and streight about him gan beholde What god or fortune would assist his might. But whether god or fortune made him bold Its hard to read: yet hardie will he had To overcome, that made him lesse adrad . The scalie backe of that most hideous snake Enwrapped round, oft faining to retire And oft him to assaile, he fiercely strake Whereas his temples did his creast front tyre ; And, for he was but slowe, did slowth off shake, And, gazing ghastly on, for feare and yre Had blent so much his sense, that lesse he feard, Yet, when he saw him slaine, himselfe he cheard. By this the Night forth from the darksome bowre Of Herebus her teemed steedes gan call, And laesie Vesper in his timely howre From golden Oeta gan proceede withall; Whenas the shepheard after this sharpe stowre , Seing the doubled shadowes low to fall, Gathering his straying flocke, does homeward fare, And unto rest his wearie ioynts prepare. Into whose sense so soone as lighter sleepe Was entered, and now loosing everie lim, Sweete slumbring deaw in carelesnesse did steepe, The image of that Gnat appeard to him, And in sad tearmes gan sorrowfully weepe, With grieslie countenaunce and visage grim, Wailing the wrong which he had done of late, In steed of good, hastning his cruell fate. Said he, What have I wretch deserv'd, that thus Into this bitter bale I am outcast, Whilest that thy life more deare and precious Was than mine owne, so long as it did last? I now, in lieu of paines so gracious, Am tost in th'ayre with everie windie blast: Thou, safe delivered from sad decay, Thy careles limbs in loose sleep dost display. So livest thou; but my poore wretched ghost Is forst to ferrie over Lethes river, And spoyld of Charon too and fro am tost. Seest thou not how all places quake and quiver, Lightned with deadly lamps on everie post? Tisiphone each where doth shake and shiver Her flaming fire-brond, encountring me, Whose lockes uncombed cruell adders be. And Cerberus, whose many mouthes doo bay, And barke out flames, as if on fire he fed, Adowne whose necke, in terrible array, Ten thousand snakes, cralling about his hed, Doo hang in heapes, that horribly affray, And bloodie eyes doo glister firie red, He oftentimes me dreadfullie doth threaten With painfull torments to be sorely beaten. Ay me! that thankes so much should faile of meed, For that I thee restor'd to life againe, Even from the doore of death and deadlie dreed. Where then is now the guerdon of my paine? Where the reward of my so piteous deed? The praise of pitie vanisht is in vaine, And th'antique faith of iustice long agone Out of the land is fled away and gone. I saw anothers fate approaching fast, And left mine owne his saftie to tender; Into the same mishap I now am cast, And shun'd destruction doth destruction render: Not unto him that never hath trespst, But punishment is due to the offender: Yet let destruction be the punishment, So long as thankfull will may it relent. I carried am into waste wildernesse, Waste wildernes, amongst Cymerian shades, Where endles paines and hideous heavinesse Is round about me heapt in darksome glades. For there huge Othos sits in sad distresse, Fast bound with serpents that him oft invades, Far of beholding Ephialtes tide, Which once assai'd to burne this world so wide. And there is mournfull Tityus, mindefull yet Of thy displeasure, O Latona faire; Displeasure too implacable was it, That made him meat for wild foules of the ayre: Much do I feare among such fiends to sit; Much do I feare back to them to repayre, To the black shadowes of the Stygian shore, Where wretched ghosts sit wailing evermore. There next the utmost brinck doth he abide That did the bankets of the gods bewray, Whose throat through thirst to nought nigh being dride, His sense to seeke for ease turnes every way: And he that in avengement of his pride, For scorning to the sacred gods to pray, Against a mountaine rolls a mightie stone, Calling in vaine for rest, and can have none. Go ye with them, go, cursed damosells, Whose bridale torches foule Erynnis tynde , And Hymen, at your spousalls sad, foretells Tydings of death and massacre unkinde : With them that cruell Colchid mother dwells, The which conceiv'd in her revengefull minde With bitter woundes her owne deere babes to slay, And murdred troupes upon great heapes to lay. There also those two Pandionian maides, Calling on Itis, Itis evermore, Whom, wretched boy, they slew with guiltie blades; For whome the Thracian king lamenting sore, Turn'd to a lapwing, fowlie them upbraydes, And flattering round about them still does sore; There now they all eternally complaine Of others wrong, and suffer endles paine. But the two brethren borne of Cadmus blood, Whilst each does for the soveraignty contend, Blinde through ambition, and with vengeance wood , Each doth against the others bodie bend His cursed steele, of neither well withstood, And with wide wounds their carcases doth rend; That yet they both doe mortall foes remaine, Sith each with brothers bloudie hand was slaine. Ah waladay! there is no end of paine, Nor chaunge of labour may intreated bee: Yet I beyond all these am carried faine, Where other powers farre different I see, And must passe over to th'Elisian plaine: There grim Persephone, encountring mee, Doth urge her fellow Furies earnestlie With their bright firebronds me to terrifie. There chast Alceste lives inviolate, Free from all care, for that her husbands daies She did prolong by changing fate for fate: Lo! there lives also the immortall praise Of womankinde, most faithfull to her mate, Penelope; and from her farre awayes A rulesse rout of yongmen which her woo'd, All slaine with darts, lie wallowed in their blood. And sad Eurydice thence now no more Must turne to life, but there detained bee For looking back, being forbid before: Yet was the guilt thereof, Orpheus, in thee! Bold sure he was, and worthie spirite bore, That durst those lowest shadowes goe to see, And could beleeve that anie thing could please Fell Cerberus, or Stygian powres appease. Ne feard the burning waves of Phlegeton, Nor those same mournfull kingdomes, compassed With rustle horrour and fowle fashion; And deep digd vawtes ; and Tartar covered With bloodie night and darke confusion; And iudgement seates, whose iudge is deadlie dred, A iudge that after death doth punish sore The faults which life hath trespassed before. But valiant fortune made Dan Orpheus bolde: For the swift running rivers still did stand, And the wilde beasts their furie did withhold, To follow Orpheus musicke through the land: And th'okes, deep grounded in the earthly molde, Did move, as if they could him understand; And the shrill woods, which were of sense bereav'd, Through their hard barke his silver sound receav'd. And eke the Moone her hastie steedes did stay, Drawing in teemes along the starrie skie; And didst, O monthly Virgin, thou delay Thy nightly course, to heare his melodie? The same was able, with like lovely lay, The Queene of Hell to move as easily To yeeld Eurydiee unto her fere, Backe to be borne, though it unlawfull were. She, ladie, having well before approoved The feends to be too cruell and severe, Observ'd th'appointed way, as her behooved, Ne ever did her eysight turne arere, Ne ever spake, ne cause of speaking mooved; But, cruell Orpheus, thou much crueller, Seeking to kisse her, brok'st the gods decree, And thereby mad'st her ever damn'd to be. Ah! but sweete love of pardon worthie is, And doth deserve to have small faults remitted; If Hell at least things lightly done amis Knew how to pardon, when ought is omitted: Yet are ye both received into blis, And to the seates of happie soules admitted. And you beside the honourable band Of great heros doo in order stand. There be the two stout sonnes of AEacus, Fierce Peleus, and the hardie Telamon, Both seeming now full glad and ioyeous Through their syres dreadfull iurisdiction, Being the iudge of all that horrid hous: And both of them, by strange occasion, Renown'd in choyce of happie marriage Through Venus grace, and vertues cariage. For th'one was ravisht of his owne bondmaide, The faire Ixione captiv'd from Troy: But th'other was with Thetis love assaid, Great Nereus his daughter and his ioy. On this side them there is a yongman layd, Their match in glorie, mightie, fierce, and coy, That from th'Argolick ships, with furious yre, Bett back the furie of the Troian fyre. O! who would not recount the strong divorces Of that great warre, which Troianes oft behelde, And oft beheld the warlike Greekish forces, When Teucrian soyle with bloodie rivers swelde, And wide Sigraean shores were spred with corses, And Simois and Xanthus blood outwelde; Whilst Hector raged, with outragious minde, Flames, weapons, wounds, in Greeks fleete to have tynde. For Ida selfe, in ayde of that fierce fight, Out of her mountaines ministred supplies; And like a kindly nourse did yeeld, for spight, Store of firebronds out of her nourseries Unto her foster children, that they might Inflame the navie of their enemies, And all the Rhetaean shore to ashes turne, Where lay the ships which they did seeke to burne. Gainst which the noble sonne of Telamon Oppos'd himselfe, and thwarting his huge shield, Them battell bad; gainst whom appeard anon Hector, the glorie of the Troian field: Both fierce and furious in contention Encountred, that their mightie strokes so shrild As the great clap of thunder, which doth ryve The railing heavens and cloudes asunder dryve. So th'one with fire and weapons did contend To cut the ships from turning home againe To Argos; th'other strove for to defend The force of Vulcane with his might and maine. Thus th'one Aeacide did his fame extend: But th'other ioy'd that, on the Phrygian playne Having the blood of vanquisht Hector shedd, He compast Troy thrice with his bodie dedd. Againe great dole on either partie grewe, That him to death unfaithfull Paris sent; And also him that false Ulysses slewe, Drawne into danger through close ambushment; Therefore from him Lartes sonne his vewe Doth turn aside, and boasts his good event In working of Strymonian Rhaesus fall, And efte in Dolons slye surprsall. Againe the dreadfull Cycones him dismay, And blacke Laestrigones, a people stout; Then greedie Scilla, under whom there bay Manie great bandogs, which her gird about; Then doo the AEtnean Cyclops him affray, And deep Charybdis gulphing in and out; Lastly the squalid lakes of Tartarie, And griesly feends of hell him terrifie. There also goodly Agamemnon bosts, The glorie of the stock of Tantalus, And famous light of all the Greekish hosts; Under whose conduct most victorious, The Dorick flames consum'd the Iliack posts. Ah! but the Greekes themselves, more dolorous, To thee, O Troy, paid penaunce for thy fall, In th'Hellespont being nigh drowned all. Well may appeare by proofe of their mischaunce The chaungfull turning of mens slipperie state, That none whom fortune freely doth advaunce Himselfe therefore to heaven should elevate: For loftie type of honour through the glaunce Of envies dart is downe in dust prostrate, And all that vaunts in worldly vanitie Shall fall through fortunes mutabilitie. Th'Argolicke power returning home againe, Enricht with spoyles of th'Ericthonian towre, Did happie winde and weather entertaine, And with good speed the fomie billowes scowre: No signe of storme, no feare of future paine, Which soone ensued them with heavie stowre : Neres to the seas a token gave, The whiles their crooked keeles the surges clave. Suddenly, whether through the gods decree, Or haplesse rising of some froward starre, The heavens on everie side enclowded bee: Black stormes and fogs are blowen up from farre, That now the pylote can no loadstarre see, But skies and seas doo make most dreadfull warre; The billowes striving to the heavens to reach, And th'heavens striving them for to impeach . And, in avengement of their bold attempt, Both sun and starres and all the heavenly powres Conspire in one to wreake their rash contempt, And downe on them to fall from highest towres: The skie, in pieces seeming to be rent, Throwes lightning forth, and haile, and harmful showres, That death on everie side to them appeares, In thousand formes, to worke more ghastly feares. Some in the greedie flouds are sunke and drent ; Some on the rocks of Caphareus are throwne; Some on th'Euboick cliffs in pieces rent; Some scattred on the Hercaean shores unknowne; And manie lost, of whom no moniment Remaines, nor memorie is to be showne: Whilst all the purchase@ of the Phrigian pray, Tost on salt billowes, round about doth stray. Here manie other like heros bee, Equall in honour to the former crue, Whom ye in goodly seates may placed see, Descended all from Rome by linage due; From Rome, that holds the world in sovereigntie, And doth all nations unto her subdue: Here Fabii and Decii doo dwell, Horatii that in vertue did excell. And here the antique fame of stout Camill Doth ever live; and constant Curtius, Who, stifly bent his vowed life to spill For countreyes health, a gulph most hideous Amidst the towne with his owne corps did fill, T'appease the Powers; and prudent Mutius, Who in his flesh endur'd the scorching flame, To daunt his foe by ensample of the same. And here wise Curius, companion Of noble vertues, lives in endles rest; And stout Flaminius, whose devotion Taught him the fires scorn'd furie to detest; And here the praise of either Scipion Abides in highest place above the best, To whom the ruin'd walls of Carthage vow'd, Trembling their forces, sound their praises lowd. Live they for ever through their lasting praise! But I, poore wretch, am forced to retourne To the sad lakes that Phoebus sunnie rayes Doo never see, where soules doo alwaies mourne; And by the wayling shores to waste my dayes, Where Phlegeton with quenchles flames doth burne; By which iust Minos righteous soules doth sever From wicked ones, to live in blisse for ever. Me therefore thus the cruell fiends of hell, Girt with long snakes and thousand yron chaynes, Through doome of that their cruell iudge compell, With bitter torture and impatient paines, Cause of my death and iust complaint to tell. For thou art he whom my poore ghost complaines To be the author of her ill unwares, That careles hear'st my intollerable cares. Them therefore as bequeathing to the winde, I now depart, returning to thee never, And leave this lamentable plaint behinde. But doo thou haunt the soft downe-rolling river, And wilde greene woods and fruitful pastures minde, And let the flitting aire my vaine words sever. Thus having said, he heavily departed With piteous crie that anie would have smarted. Now, when the sloathfull fit of lifes sweete rest Had left the heavie Shepheard, wondrous cares His inly grieved minde full sore opprest; That balefull sorrow he no longer beares For that Gnats death, which deeply was imprest, But bends what ever power his aged yeares Him lent, yet being such as through their might He lately slue his dreadfull foe in fight. By that same river lurking under greene, Eftsoones he gins to fashion forth a place, And, squaring it in compasse well beseene , There plotteth out a tombe by measured space: To dig up sods out of the flowrie grasse, His worke he shortly to good purpose brought, Like as he had conceiv'd it in his thought. An heape of earth he hoorded up on hie, Enclosing it with banks on everie side, And thereupon did raise full busily A little mount, of greene turffs edifide ; And on the top of all, that passers by Might it behold, the toomb he did provide Of smoothest marble stone in order set, That never might his luckie scape forget. And round about he taught sweete flowres to growe; The Rose, engrained in pure scarlet die; The Lilly fresh, and Violet belowe; The Marigolde, and cherefull Rosemarie; The Spartan Mirtle, whence sweet gumb does flowe; The purple Hyacinths, and fresh Costmarie, And Saffron, sought for in Cilician soyle, And Lawrell, th'ornament of Phoebus toyle: Fresh Rhododaphne, and the Sabine flowre , Matching the wealth of th'auncient Frankincence; And pallid Yvie, building his owne bowre; And Box, yet mindfull of his olde offence; Red Amaranthus, lucklesse paramour; Oxeye still greene, and bitter Patience; Ne wants there pale Narcisse, that, in a well Seeing his beautie, in love with it fell. And whatsoever other flowre of worth, And whatso other hearb of lovely hew The ioyous Spring out of the ground brings forth, To cloath her selfe in colours fresh and new, He planted there, and reard a mount of earth, In whose high front was writ as doth ensue: To thee, small Gnat, in lieu of his life saved, The Shepheard hath thy deaths record engraved. leave. Your La: ever humbly, It was the month in which the righteous Maide That for disdaine of sinfull worlds upbraide Fled back to heaven, whence she was first conceived, Into her silver bowre the Sunne received; And the hot Syrian Dog on him awayting, After the chafed Lyons cruell bayting, Corrupted had th'ayre with his noysome breath. And powr'd on th'earth plague, pestilence, and death. Emongst the rest a wicked maladie Raign'd emongst men, that manie did to die, Depriv'd of sense and ordinarie reason; That it to leaches seemed strange and geason. My fortune was, mongst manie others moe, To be partaker of their common woe; And my weake bodie, set on fire with griefe, Was rob'd of rest and naturall reliefe. In this ill plight, there came to visite mee Some friends, who, sorie my sad case to see, Began to comfort me in chearfull wise, And meanes of gladsome solace to devise. But seeing kindly sleep refuse to doe His office, and my feeble eyes forgoe, They sought my troubled sense how to deceave With talke that might unquiet fancies reave; And sitting all in seates about me round, With pleasant tales fit for that idle stound They cast in course to waste the wearie howres. Some tolde of ladies, and their paramoures; Some of brave knights, and their renowned squires; Some of the faeries and their strange attires; And some of giaunts hard to be beleeved; That the delight thereof me much releeved. Amongst the rest a good old woman was, Hight Mother Hubberd, who did farre surpas The rest in honest mirth, that seem'd her well. She, when her turne was come her tale to tell, Tolde of a strange adventure that betided Betwixt the Foxe and th'Ape by him misguided; The which, for that my sense it greatly pleased, All were my spirite heavie and diseased, Ile write in termes, as she the same did say, So well as I her words remember may. No Muses aide me needes heretoo to call; Base is the style, and matter meane withall. Whilome, said she, before the world was civill, The Foxe and th'Ape, disliking of their evill And hard estate, determined to seeke Their fortunes farre abroad, lyeke with his lyeke: For both were craftie and unhappie witted; Two fellowes might no where be better fitted. The Foxe, that first this cause of griefe did finde, Gan first thus plaine his case with words unkinde: Neighbour Ape, and my gossip eke beside, Both two sure bands in friendship to be tide, To whom may I more trustely complaine The evill plight that doth me sore constraine, And hope thereof to finde due remedie? Heare then my paine and inward agonie. Thus manie yeares I now have spent and worne, In meane regard, and basest fortunes scorne, Dooing my countrey service as I might, No lesse I dare saie than the prowdest wight; And still I hoped to be up advaunced For my good parts; but still it hath mischaunced. Now therefore that no lenger hope I see, But froward fortune still to follow mee, And losels lifted up on high, where I did looke, I meane to turne the next leafe of the booke. Yet ere that anie way I doe betake, I meane my gossip privie first to make. Ah! my deare gossip, answer'd then the Ape, Deeply doo your sad words my wits awhape, Both for because your griefe doth great appeare, And eke because my selfe am touched neare: For I likewise have wasted much good time, Still wayting to preferment up to clime, Whilst others alwayes have before me stept, And from my beard the fat away have swept; That now unto despaire I gin to growe, And meane for better winde about to throwe. Therefore to me, my trustie friend, aread Thy councell: two is better than one head. Certes, said he, I meane me to disguize In some straunge habit, after uncouth wize, Or like a pilgrime, or a lymiter, district. Or like a gipsen, or a iuggeler, And so to wander to the worlds ende, To seeke my fortune, where I may it mend: For worse than that I have I cannot meete. Wide is the world I wote, and everie streete Is full of fortunes and adventures straunge, Continuallie subiect unto chaunge. Say, my faire brother now, if this device Doth like you, or may you to like entice. Surely, said th'Ape, it likes me wondrous well; And would ye not poore fellowship expell, My selfe would offer you t'accompanie In this adventures chauncefull ieopardie. For to wexe olde at home in idlenesse Is disadventrous, and quite fortunelesse: Abroad, where change is, good may gotten bee. The Foxe was glad, and quickly did agree: So both resolv'd, the morrow next ensuing, So soone as day appeard to peoples vewing, On their intended iourney to proceede; And over night, whatso theretoo did neede Each did prepare, in readines to bee. The morrow next, so soone as one might see Light out of heavens windowes forth to looke, Both their habiliments unto them tooke, And put themselves, a Gods name, on their way. Whenas the Ape, beginning well to wey This hard adventure, thus began t'advise: Now read, Sir Reynold, as ye be right wise, What course ye weene is best for us to take, That for our selves we may a living make. Whether shall we professe some trade or skill? Or shall we varie our device at will, Even as new occasion appeares? Or shall we tie our selves for certaine yeares To anie service, or to anie place? For it behoves, ere that into the race We enter, to resolve first hereupon. Now surely, brother, said the Foxe anon, Te have this matter motioned in season: For everie thing that is begun with reason Will come by readie meanes unto his end; But things miscounselled must needs miswend. Thus therefore I advize upon the case: That not to anie certaine trade or place, Nor anie man, we should our selves applie. For why should he that is at libertie Make himselfe bond? Sith then we are free borne. Let us all servile base subiection scorne; And as we bee sonnes of the world so wide, Let us our fathers heritage divide, And chalenge to our selves our portions dew Of all the patrimonie, which a few Now hold in hugger mugger in their hand, And all the rest doo rob of good and land: For now a few have all, and all have nought, Yet all be brethren ylike dearly bought. There is no right in this partition, Ne was it so by institution Ordained first, ne by the law of Nature, But that she gave like blessing to each creture As well of worldly livelode as of life, That there might be no difference nor strife, Nor ought cald mine or thine: thrice happie then Was the condition of mortall men. That was the golden age of Saturne old, But this might better be the world of gold; For without golde now nothing wilbe got. Therefore, if please you, this shalbe our plot: We will not be of anie occupation; Let such vile vassalls, borne to base vocation, Drudge in the world and for their living droyle, Which have no wit to live withouten toyle. But we will walke about the world at pleasure, Like two free men, and make our ease our treasure. Free men some beggers call; but they be free; And they which call them so more beggers bee: For they doo swinke and sweate to feed the other, Who live like lords of that which they doo gather, And yet doo never thanke them for the same, But as their due by nature doo it clame. Such will we fashion both our selves to bee, Lords of the world; and so will wander free Where so us listeth, uncontrol'd of anie. Hard is our hap, if we, emongst so manie, Light not on some that may our state amend; Sildome but some good commeth ere the end. Well seemd the Ape to like this ordinaunce: Yet, well considering of the circumstaunce, As pausing in great doubt awhile he staid, And afterwards with grave advizement said: I cannot, my lief brother, like but well The purpose of the complot which ye tell; For well I wot compar'd to all the rest Of each degree that beggers life is best, And they that thinke themselves the best of all Oft-times to begging are content to fall. But this I wot withall, that we shall ronne Into great daunger, like to bee undonne, Thus wildly to wander in the worlds eye, Withouten pasport or good warrantye, For feare least we like rogues should be reputed, And for eare-marked beasts abroad be bruted. Therefore I read that we our counsells call How to prevent this mischiefe ere it fall, And how we may, with most securitie, Beg amongst those that beggars doo defie. Right well, deere gossip, ye advized have, Said then the Foxe, but I this doubt will save: For ere we farther passe, I will devise A pasport for us both in fittest wize, And by the names of souldiers us protect, That now is thought a civile begging sect. Be you the souldier, for you likest are For manly semblance, and small skill in warre: I will but wayte on you, and, as occasion Falls out, my selfe fit for the same will fashion. The pasport ended, both they forward went; The Ape clad souldierlike, fit for th'intent, In a blew iacket with a crosse of redd And manie slits, as if that he had shedd Much blood throgh many wounds therein receaved, Which had the use of his right arme bereaved, Upon his head an old Scotch cap he wore, With a plume feather all to peeces tore; His breeches were made after the new cut, Al Portugese , loose like an emptie gut, And his hose broken high above the heeling, And his shooes beaten out with traveling. But neither sword nor dagger he did beare; Seemes that no foes revengement he did feare; In stead of them a handsome bat he held, On which he leaned, as one farre in elde. Shame light on him, that through so false illusion Doth turne the name of souldiers to abusion, And that which is the noblest mysterie Brings to reproach and common infamie! Long they thus travailed, yet never met Adventure which might them a working set: Yet manie waies they sought, and manie tryed; Yet for their purposes none fit espyed. At last they chaunst to meete upon the way A simple husbandman in garments gray; Yet, though his vesture were but meane and bace, A good yeoman he was of honest place, And more for thrift did care than for gay clothing: Gay without good is good hearts greatest loathing. The Foxe, him spying, bad the Ape him dight To play his part, for loe! he was in sight That, if he er'd not, should them entertaine, And yeeld them timely profite for their paine. Eftsoones the Ape himselfe gan up to reare, And on his shoulders high his bat to beare, As if good service he were fit to doo, But little thrift for him he did it too: And stoutly forward he his steps did straine, That like a handsome swaine it him became. When as they nigh approached, that good man, Seeing them wander loosly, first began T'enquire, of custome, what and whence they were. To whom the Ape: I am a souldiere, That late in warres have spent my deerest blood, And in long service lost both limbs and good; And now, constraint that trade to overgive, I driven am to seeke some meanes to live: Which might it you in pitie please t'afford, I would be readie, both in deed and word, To doo you faithfull service all my dayes. This yron world that same he weeping sayes Brings downe the stowtest hearts to lowest state: For miserie doth bravest mindes abate, And make them seeke for that they wont to scorne, Of fortune and of hope at once forlorne. The honest roan that heard him thus complaine Was griev'd as he had felt part of his paine; And, well dispos'd him some reliefe to showe, Askt if in husbandrie he ought did knowe, To plough, to plant, to reap, to rake, to sowe, To hedge, to ditch, to thrash, to thetch, to mowe; Or to what labour els he was prepar'd: For husbands life is labourous and hard. Whenas the Ape him hard so much to talke Of labour, that did from his liking balke, He would have slipt the coller handsomly, And to him said: Good Sir, full glad am I To take what paines may anie living wight: But my late maymed limbs lack wonted might To doo their kindly services, as needeth: Scarce this right hand the mouth with diet feedeth; So that it may no painfull worke endure, Ne to strong labour can it selfe enure. But if that anie other place you have, Which askes small paines, but thriftines to save, Or care to overlooke, or trust to gather, Ye may me trust as your owne ghostly father. With that the husbandman gan him avize, That it for him were fittest exercise Cattell to keep, or grounds to oversee; And asked him, if he could willing bee To keep his sheep, or to attend his swyne, Or watch his mares, or take his charge of kyne. Gladly, said he, what ever such like paine Ye put on me, I will the same sustaine: But gladliest I of your fleecie sheepe Might it you please would take on me the keep. For ere that unto armes I me betooke, Unto my fathers sheepe I usde to looke, That yet the skill thereof I have not loste: Thereto right well this curdog, by my coste, Meaning the Foxe, will serve my sheepe to gather, And drive to follow after their belwether. The husbandman was meanly well content Triall to make of his endevourment; And, home him leading, lent to him the charge Of all his flocke, with libertie full large, Giving accompt of th'annuall increce Both of their lambes, and of their woolly fleece. Thus is this Ape become a shepheard swaine, And the false Foxe his dog: God give them paine! For ere the yeare have halfe his course out-run, And doo returne from whence he first begun, They shall him make an ill accompt of thrift. Now whenas time, flying with wings swift, Expired had the terme that these two iavels Should render up a reckning of their travels Unto their master, which it of them sought, Exceedingly they troubled were in thought, Ne wist what answere unto him to frame, Ne how to scape great punishment, or shame, For their false treason and vile theeverie: For not a lambe of all their flockes-supply Had they to shew; but ever as they bred, They slue them, and upon their fleshes fed: For that disguised dog lov'd blood to spill, And drew the wicked shepheard to his will. So twixt them both they not a lambkin left; And when lambes fail'd, the old sheepes lives they reft; That how t'acquite themselves unto their lord They were in doubt, and flatly set abord. The Foxe then counsel'd th'Ape for to require Respite till morrow t'answere his desire: For times delay new hope of helpe still breeds. The good man granted, doubting nought their deeds, And bad next day that all should readie be. But they more subtill meaning had than he: For the next morrowes meed they closely ment, For feare of afterclaps, for to prevent: And that same evening, when all shrowded were In careles sleep, they without care or feare Cruelly fell upon their flock in folde, And of them slew at pleasure what they wolde. Of which whenas they feasted had their fill, For a full complement of all their ill, They stole away, and tooke their hastie flight, Carried in clowdes of all-concealing night. So was the husbandman left to his losse, And they unto their fortunes change to tosse. After which sort they wandered long while, Abusing manie through their cloaked guile; That at the last they gan to be descryed Of everie one, and all their sleights espyed; So as their begging now them failed quyte, For none would give, but all men would them wyte. Yet would they take no paines to get their living, But seeke some other way to gaine by giving, Much like to begging, but much better named; For manie beg which are thereof ashamed. And now the Foxe had gotten him a gowne, And th'Ape a cassocke sidelong hanging downe; For they their occupation meant to change, And now in other state abroad to range: For since their souldiers pas no better spedd, They forg'd another, as for clerkes booke-redd. Who passing foorth, as their adventures fell, Through manie haps, which needs not here to tell, At length chaunst with a formall Priest to meete, Whom they in civill manner first did greete, And after askt an almes for Gods deare love. The man straightway his choler up did move, And with reproachfull tearmes gan them revile, For following that trade so base and vile; And askt what license or what pas they had. Ah! said the Ape, as sighing wondrous sad, Its an hard case, when men of good deserving Must either driven be perforce to sterving, Or asked for their pas by everie squib, That list at will them to revile or snib. And yet God wote small oddes I often see Twixt them that aske, and them that asked bee. Natheles because you shall not us misdeeme, But that we are as honest as we seeme, Yee shall our pasport at your pleasure see, And then ye will I hope well mooved bee. Which when the Priest beheld, he vew'd it nere, As if therein some text he studying were, But little els God wote could thereof skill: For read he could not evidence nor will, Ne tell a written word, ne write a letter, Ne make one title worse, ne make one better. Of such deep learning little had he neede, Ne yet of Latine ne of Greeke, that breede Doubts mongst divines, and difference of texts, From whence arise diversitie of sects, And hatefull heresies, of God abhor'd. But this good Sir did follow the plaine word, Ne medled with their controversies vaine; All his care was his service well to saine, And to read homelies upon holidayes; When that was done, he might attend his playes: An easie life, and fit high God to please. He, having overlookt their pas at ease, Gan at the length them to rebuke againe, That no good trade of life did entertaine, But lost their time in wandring loose abroad; Seeing the world, in which they bootles boad, Had wayes enough for all therein to live; Such grace did God unto his creatures give. Said then the Foxe: Who hath the world not tride From the right way full eath may wander wide. We are but novices, new come abroad, We have not yet the tract of anie troad, Nor on us taken anie state of life, But readie are of anie to make preife. Therefore might please you, which the world have proved, Us to advise, which forth but lately moved, Of some good course that we might undertake, Ye shall for ever us your bondmen make. The priest gan wexe halfe proud to be so praide, And thereby willing to affoord them aide, It seemes, said he, right well that ye be clerks, Both by your wittie words and by your works. Is not that name enough to make a living To him that hath a whit of Natures giving? How manie honest men see ye arize Daylie thereby, and grow to goodly prize; To deanes, to archdeacons, to commissaries, To lords, to principalls, to prebendaries? All iolly prelates, worthie rule to beare, Who ever them envie: yet spite bites neare. Why should ye doubt, then, but that ye likewise Might unto some of those in time arise? In the meane time to live in good estate, Loving that love, and hating those that hate; Being some honest curate, or some vicker, Content with little in condition sicker. Ah! but, said th'Ape, the charge is wondrous great, To feed mens soules, and hath an heavie threat. To feede mens soules, quoth he, is not in man: For they must feed themselves, doo what we can. We are but charg'd to lay the meate before: Eate they that list, we need to doo no more. But God it is that feedes them with his grace, The bread of life powr'd downe from heavenly place. Therefore said he that with the budding rod Did rule the lewes, All shalbe taught of God. That same hath Iesus Christ now to him raught, By whom the flock is rightly fed and taught: He is the shcpheard, and the priest is hee; We but his shepheard swaines ordain'd to bee. Therefore herewith doo not your selfe dismay; Ne is the paines so great, but beare ye may; For not so great, as it was wont of yore, It's now a dayes, ne halfe so streight and sore. They whilome used duly everie day Their service and their holie things to say, At morne and even, beside their anthemes sweete, Their penie masses, and their complynes meete, Their diriges, their trentals, and their shrifts, Their memories, their singings, and their gifts. Now all those needlesse works are laid away; Now once a weeke, upon the Sabbath day, It is enough to doo our small devotion, And then to follow any merrie motion. Ne are we tyde to fast, but when we list; Ne to weare garments base of wollen twist, But with the finest silkes us to aray, That before God we may appeare more gay, Resembling Aarons glorie in his place: For farre unfit it is, that person bace Should with vile cloaths approach Gods maiestie, Whom no uncleannes may approachen nie; Or that all men, which anie master serve, Good garments for their service should deserve, But he that serves the Lord of Hoasts Most High, And that in highest place, t'approach him nigh, And all the peoples prayers to present Before his throne, as on ambassage sent Both too and fro, should not deserve to weare A garment better than of wooll or heare. Beside, we may have lying by our sides Our lovely lasses, or bright shining brides; We be not tyde to wilfull chastitie, But have the gospell of free libertie. By that he ended had his ghostly sermon, The Foxe was well induc'd to be a parson; And of the priest eftsoones gan to enquire How to a benefice he might aspire. Marie, there, said the priest, is arte indeed: Much good deep learning one thereout may reed; For that the ground-worke is, and end of all, How to obtaine a beneficiall. First, therefore, when ye have in handsome wise Your selfe attyred, as you can devise, Then to some nobleman your selfe applye, Or other great one in the worlds eye, That hath a zealous disposition To God, and so to his religion. There must thou fashion eke a godly zeale, Such as no carpers may contrayre reveale: For each thing fained ought more warie bee. There thou must walke in sober gravitee, And seeme as saintlike as Saint Radegund: Fast much, pray oft, looke lowly on the ground, And unto everie one doo curtesie meeke: These lookes nought saying doo a benefice seeke, And be thou sure one not to lacke or long. But if thee list unto the Court to throng, And there to hunt after the hoped pray, Then must thou thee dispose another way For there thou needs must learne to laugh, to lie, To face, to forge, to scoffe, to companie, To crouche, to please, to be a beetle-stock Of thy great masters will, to scorne, or mock: So maist thou chaunce mock out a benefice, Unlesse thou canst one coniure by device, Or cast a figure for a bishoprick: And if one could, it were but a schoole trick. These be the wayes by which without reward Livings in court he gotten, though full hard; For nothing there is done without a fee: The courtier needes must recompenced bee With a benevolence, or have in gage The primitias of your parsonage: Scarse can a bishoprick forpas them by, But that it must be gelt in privitie. Doo not thou therefore seeke a living there, But of more private persons seeke elswhere, Whereas thou maist compound a better penie, Ne let thy learning question'd be of anie. For some good gentleman, that hath the right Unto his church for to present a wight, Will cope with thee in reasonable wise, That if the living yerely doo arise To fortie pound, that then his yongest sonne Shall twentie have, and twentie thou hast wonne: Thou hast it wonne, for it is of franke gift And he will care for all the rest to shift; Both that the bishop may admit of thee, And that therein thou maist maintained bee. This is the way for one that is unlern'd Living to get, and not to be discern'd. But they that are great clerkes have nearer wayes For learning sake to living them to raise: Yet manie eke of them God wote are driven T'accept a benefice in peeces riven. How saist thou, friend, have I not well discourst Upon this common-place, though plaine, not wourst? Better a short tale than a bad long shriving: Needes anie more to learne to get a living? Now sure, and by my hallidome, quoth he Yea great master are in your degree: Great thankes I yeeld you for your discipline, And doo not doubt but duly to encline My wits theretoo, as ye shall shortly heare. The priest him wisht good speed and well to fare: So parted they, as eithers way them led. But th'Ape and Foxe ere long so well them sped, Through the priests holesome counsell lately tought, And throgh their owne faire handling wisely wroght, That they a benefice twixt them obtained, And craftie Reynold was a priest ordained, And th'Ape his parish clarke procur'd to bee: Then made they revell route and goodly glee. But, ere long time had passed, they so ill Did order their affaires, that th'evill will Of all their parishners they had constraind; Who to the ordinarie of them complain'd, How fowlie they their offices abusd, And them of crimes and heresies accusd; That pursivants he often for them sent. But they neglected his commaundment; So long persisted obstinate and bolde, Till at the length he published to holde A visitation, and them cyted thether. Then was high time their wits about to geather; What did they then, but made a composition With their next neighbor priest for light condition, To whom their living they resigned quight For a few pence, and ran away by night. So passing through the countrey in disguize, They fled farre off, where none might them surprize, And after that long straied here and there, Through everie field and forrest farre and nere; Yet never found occasion for their tourne, But, almost sterv'd, did much lament and mourne. At last they chaunst to meete upon the way The Mule, all deckt in goodly rich aray, With bells and bosses that full lowdly rung, And costly trappings that to ground downe hung. Lowly they him saluted in meeke wise; But he through pride and fatnes gan despise Their meanesse; scarce vouchsafte them to requite. Whereat the Foxe deep groning in his sprite, Said: Ah! Sir Mule, now blessed be the day That I see you so goodly and so gay In your attyres, and eke your silken hyde Fil'd with round flesh, that everie bone doth hide. Seemes that in fruitfull pastures ye doo live, Or fortune doth you secret favour give. Foolish Foxe! said the Mule, thy wretched need Praiseth the thing that doth thy sorrow breed. For well I weene thou canst not but envie My wealth, compar'd to thine owne miserie, That art so leane and meagre waxen late That scarse thy legs uphold thy feeble gate. Ay me! said then the Foxe, whom evill hap Unworthy in such wretchednes doth wrap, And makes the scorne of other beasts to bee. But read, faire Sir, of grace, from whence come yee; Or what of tidings you abroad doo heare; Newes may perhaps some good unweeting beare. From royall court I lately came, said he, Where all the braverie that eye may see, And all the happinesse that heart desire, Is to be found; he nothing can admire, That hath not seene that heavens portracture. But tidings there is none, I you assure, Save that which common is, and knowne to all, That courtiers as the tide doo rise and fall. But tell us, said the Ape, we doo you pray, Who now in court doth beare the greatest sway: That, if such fortune doo to us befall, We may seeke favour of the best of all. Marie, said he, the highest now in grace, Be the wilde beasts, that swiftest are in chase; For in their speedie course and nimble flight The Lyon now doth take the most delight: But chieflie ioyes on foote them to beholde, Enchaste with chaine and circulet of golde: So wilde a beaste so tame ytaught to bee, And buxome to his bands, is ioy to see; So well his golden circlet him beseemeth. But his late chayne his Liege unmeete esteemeth; For so brave beasts she loveth best to see In the wilde forrest raunging fresh and free. Therefore if fortune thee in court to live, In case thou ever there wilt hope to thrive, To some of these thou must thy selfe apply; Els as a thistle-downe in th'ayre doth flie, So vainly shalt thou too and fro be tost, And loose thy labour and thy fruitles cost. And yet full few which follow them I see For vertues bare regard advaunced bee, But either for some gainfull benefit, Or that they may for their owne turnes be fit. Nath'les, perhaps ye things may handle soe, That ye may better thrive than thousands moe. But, said the Ape, how shall we first come in, That after we may favour seeke to win? How els, said he, but with a good bold face, And with big words, and with a stately pace, That men may thinke of you in generall That to be in you which is not at all: For not by that which is the world now deemeth, As it was wont but by that same that seemeth. Ne do I doubt but that ye well can fashion Your selves theretoo, according to occasion. So fare ye well: good courtiers may ye bee! So, proudlie neighing, from them parted hee. Then gan this craftie couple to devize, How for the court themselves they might aguize: For thither they themselves meant to addresse, In hope to finde there happier successe. So well they shifted, that the Ape anon Himselfe had cloathed like a gentleman, And the slie Foxe as like to be his groome; That to the court in seemly sort they come. Where the fond Ape, himselfe uprearing by Upon his tiptoes, stalketh stately by, As if he were some great magnifico, And boldlie doth amongst the boldest go; And his man Reynold, with fine counterfesaunce, Supports his credite and his countenaunce. Then gan the courtiers gaze on everie side, And stare on him with big looks basen wide, Wondring what mister wight he was, and whence; For he was clad in strange accoustrements, Fashion'd with queint devises never seene In court before, yet there all fashions beene; Yet he them in newfanglenesse did pas. But his behaviour altogether was Alla Turchesca, much the more admyr'd; And his lookes loftie, as if he aspyr'd To dignitie, and sdeign'd the low degree; That all which did such strangenesse in him see By secrete meanes gan of his state enquire, And privily his servant thereto hire: Who, throughly arm'd against such coverture, Reported unto all that he was sure A noble gentleman of high regard, Which through the world had with long travel far'd, And seene the manners of all beasts on ground, Now here arriv'd to see if like he found. Thus did the Ape at first him credit gaine, Which afterwards he wisely did maintaine With gallant showe, and daylie more augment Through his fine feates and courtly complement; For he could play, and daunce, and vaute, and spring, And all that els pertaines to reveling. Onely through kindly aptnes of his ioynts. Besides he could doo manie other poynts, The which in court him served to good stead: For he mongst ladies could their fortunes read Out of their hands, and merie leasings tell, And iuggle finely, that became him well. But he so light was at legierdemaine, That what he toucht came not to light againe; Yet would he laugh it out, and proudly looke, And tell them that they greatly him mistooke. So would he scoffe them out with mockcrie, For he therein had great felicitie; And with sharp quips ioy'd others to deface, Thinking that their disgracing did him grace: So whilst that other like vaine wits he pleased And made to laugh, his heart was greatly eased. But the right gentle minde woulde bite his lip, To heare the iavell so good men to nip: For, though the vulgar yeeld an open eare, And common courtiers love to gybe and fleare At everie thing which they heare spoken ill, And the best speaches with ill meaning spill, Yet the brave courtier, in whose beauteous thought Regard of honour harbours more than ought, Doth loath such base condition, to backbite Anies good name for envie or despite. He stands on tearmes of honourable minde, Ne will be carried with the common winde Of courts inconstant mutabilitie, Ne after everie tattling fable flie; But heares and sees the follies of the rest, And thereof gathers for himselfe the best. He will not creepe, nor crouche with fained face, But walkes upright with comely stedfast pace, And unto all doth yeeld due curtesie; But not with kissed hand belowe the knee, As that same apish crue is wont to doo: For he disdaines himselfe t'embase theretoo. He hates fowle leasings and vile flatterie, Two filthie blots in noble gentrie; And lothefull idlenes he doth detest, The canker worme of everie gentle brest; The which to banish with faire exercise Of knightly feates he daylie doth devise: Now menaging the mouthes of stubborne steedes, Now practising the proofe of warlike deedes, Now his bright armes assaying, now his speare, Now the nigh aymed ring away to beare: At other times he casts to sew the chace Of Swift wilde beasts, or runne on foote a race, T'enlarge his breath, large breath in armes most needfull, Or els by wrestling to wex strong and heedfull, Or his stiffe armes to stretch with eughen bowe, And manly legs, still passing too and fro, Without a gowned beast him fast beside; A vaine ensample of the Persian pride, Who after he had wonne th'Assyrian foe, Did ever after scorne on foote to goe. Thus when this courtly gentleman with toyle Himselfe hath wearied, he doth recoyle Unto his rest, and there with sweete delight Of musicks skill revives his toyled spright; Or els with loves and ladies gentle sports, The ioy of youth, himselfe he recomforts: Or lastly, when the bodie list to pause, His minde unto the Muses he withdrawes, Sweete Ladie Muses, ladies of delight, Delights of life, and ornaments of light: With whom he close confers with wise discourse, Of Natures workes, of heavens continuall course, Of forreine lands, of people different, Of kingdomes change, of divers gouvernment, Of dreadfull battailes of renowmed knights; With which he kindleth his ambitious sprights To like desire and praise of noble fame, The onely upshot whereto he doth ayme. For all his minde on honour fixed is, To which he levels all his purposis, And in his Princes service spends his dayes, Not so much for to game, or for to raise Himselfe to high degree, as for his grace, And in his liking to winne worthie place, Through due deserts and comely carriage, In whatso please employ his personage, That may be matter meete to game him praise. For he is fit to use in all assayes, Whether for armes and warlike amenaunce, Or else for wise and civill governaunce; For he is practiz'd well in policie, And thereto doth his courting most applie: To learne the enterdeale of princes strange, To marke th'intent of counsells, and the change Of states, and eke of private men somewhile, Supplanted by fine falshood and faire guile; Of all the which he gathereth what is fit T'enrich the storehouse of his powerfull wit, Which through wise speaches and grave conference He daylie eekes, and brings to excellence. Such is the rightfull courtier in his kinde: But unto such the Ape lent not his minde; Such were for him no fit companions, Such would descrie his lewd conditions: But the yong lustie gallants he did chose To follow, meete to whom he might disclose His witlesse pleasance and ill pleasing vaine. A thousand wayes he them could entertaine, With all the thriftles games that may be found; With mumming and with masking all around, With dice, with cards, with balliards farre unfit, With shuttelcocks, misseeming manlie wit, With courtizans, and costly riotize, Whereof still somewhat to his share did rize: Ne, them to pleasure, would he sometimes scorne A pandares coate so basely was he borne ; Thereto he could fine loving verses frame, And play the poet oft. But ah! for shame, Let not sweete poets praise, whose onely pride Is vertue to advaunce, and vice deride, Be with the worke of losels wit defamed, Ne let such verses poetrie be named! Yet he the name on him would rashly take, Maugre the sacred Muses, and it make A servant to the vile affection Of such as he depended most upon; And with the sugrie sweete thereof allure Chast ladies eares to fantasies impure. To such delights the noble wits he led Which him reliev'd, and their vaine humours fed With fruitles folies and unsound delights. But if perhaps into their noble sprights Desire of honor or brave thought of armes Did ever creepe, then with his wicked charmes And strong conceipts he would it drive away, Ne suffer it to house there halfe a day. And whenso love of letters did inspire Their gentle wits, and kindly wise desire, That chieflie doth each noble minde adorne, Then he would scoffe at learning, and eke scorne The sectaries thereof, as people base And simple men, which never came in place Of worlds affaires, but, in darke corners mewd, Muttred of matters as their bookes them shewd, Ne other knowledge ever did attaine, But with their gownes their gravitie maintaine. From them he would his impudent lewde speach Against Gods holie ministers oft reach, And mocke divines and their profession. What else then did he by progression, But mocke High God himselfe, whom they professe? But what car'd he for God, or godlinesse? All his care was himselfe how to advaunce, And to uphold his courtly countenaunce By all the cunning meanes he could devise; Were it by honest wayes, or otherwise, He made small choyce: yet sure his honestie Got him small gaines, but shameles flatterie, And filthie brocage, and unseemly shifts, And borowe base, and some good ladies gifts. But the best helpe, which chiefly him sustain'd, Was his man Raynolds purchase which he gain'd: For he was school'd by kinde in all the skill Of close conveyance, and each practise ill Of coosinage and cleanly knaverie, Which oft maintain'd his masters braverie. Besides, he usde another slipprie slight, In taking on himselfe, in common sight, False personages fit for everie sted, With which he thousands cleanly coosined: Now like a merchant, merchants to deceave, With whom his credite he did often leave In gage for his gay masters hopelesse dett: Now like a lawyer, when he land would lett, Or sell fee-simples in his masters name, Which he had never, nor ought like the same; Then would he be a broker, and draw in Both wares and money, by exchange to win: Then would he seeme a farmer, that would sell Bargaines of woods, which he did lately fell, Or corne, or cattle, or such other ware, Thereby to coosin men not well aware: Of all the which there came a secret fee To th'Ape, that he his countenaunce might bee. Besides all this, he us'd oft to beguile Poore suters that in court did haunt some while: For he would learne their busines secretly, And then informe his master hastely, That he by meanes might cast them to prevent, And beg the sute the which the other ment. Or otherwise false Reynold would abuse The simple suter, and wish him to chuse His master, being one of great regard In court, to compas anie sute not hard, In case his paines were recompenst with reason: So would he worke the silly man by treason To buy his masters frivolous good will, That had not power to doo him good or ill. So pitifull a thing is suters state! Most miserable man, whom wicked fate Hath brought to court, to sue for had-ywist, That few have found, and manie one hath mist! Full little knowest thou that hast not tride, What hell it is in suing long to bide: To loose good dayes, that might be better spent; To wast long nights in pensive discontent; To speed to day, to be put back to morrow; To feed on hope, to pine with feare and sorrow; To have thy Princes grace, yet want her Peeres; To have thy asking, yet waite manie yeeres; To fret thy soule with crosses and with cares; To eate thy heart through comfortlesse dispaires; To fawne, to crowche, to waite, to ride, to ronne, To spend, to give, to want, to be undonne. Unhappie wight, borne to desastrous end, That doth his life in so long tendance spend! Who ever leaves sweete home, where meane estate In safe assurance, without strife or hate, Findes all things needfull for contentment meeke, And will to court for shadowes vaine to seeke, Or hope to gaine, himselfe will a daw trie: That curse God send unto mine enemie! For none but such as this bold Ape unblest Can ever thrive in that unluckie quest; Or such as hath a Reynold to his man, That by his shifts his master furnish can. But yet this Foxe could not so closely hide His craftie feates, but that they were descride At length by such as sate in iustice seate, Who for the same him fowlie did entreate; And, having worthily him punished, Out of the court for ever banished. And now the Ape, wanting his huckster man, That wont provide his necessaries, gan To growe into great lacke, ne could upholde His countenaunce in those his garments olde; Ne new ones could he easily provide, Though all men him uncased gan deride, Like as a puppit placed in a play, Whose part once past all men bid take away: So that he driven was to great distresse, And shortly brought to hopelesse wretchednesse. Then closely as he might he cast to leave The court, not asking any passe or leave; But ran away in his rent rags by night, Ne ever stayd in place, ne spake to wight, Till that the Foxe, his copesmate, he had found; To whome complayning his unhappie stound, At last againe with him in travell ioynd, And with him far'd some better chaunee to fynde. So in the world long time they wandered, And mickle want and hardnesse suffered; That them repented much so foolishly To come so farre to seeke for misery, And leave the sweetnes of contented home, Though eating hipps and drinking watry fome. Thus as they them complayned too and fro, Whilst through the forest rechlesse they did goe, Lo! where they spide how in a gloomy glade The Lyon sleeping lay in secret shade, His crowne and scepter lying him beside, And having doft for heate his dreadfull hide: Which when they saw, the Ape was sore afrayde, And would have fled with terror all dismayde. But him the Foxe with hardy words did stay, And bad him put all cowardize away; For now was time, if ever they would hope, To ayme their counsels to the fairest scope, And them for ever highly to advaunce, In case the good which their owne happie chaunce Them freely offred they would wisely take. Scarse could the Ape yet speake, so did he quake; Yet, as he could, he askt how good might growe Where nought but dread and death do seeme in show. Now, sayd he, whiles the Lyon sleepeth sound, May we his crowne and mace take from the ground, And eke his skinne, the terror of the wood, Wherewith we may our selves, if we thinke good, Make kings of beasts, and lords of forests all Subiect unto that powre imperiall. Ah! but, sayd the Ape, who is so bold a wretch, That dare his hardy hand to those outstretch, When as he knowes his meede, if he be spide, To be a thousand deathes, and shame beside? Fond Ape! sayd then the Foxe, into whose brest Never crept thought of honor nor brave gest, Who will not venture life a king to be, And rather rule and raigne in soveraign see, Than dwell in dust inglorious and bace, Where none shall name the number of his place? One ioyous howre in blisfull happines, I chose before a life of wretchednes. Be therefore counselled herein by me, And shake off this vile-harted cowardree. If he awake, yet is not death the next, For we may colour it with some pretext Of this or that, that may excuse the cryme: Else we may flye; thou to a tree mayst clyme, And I creepe under ground; both from his reach: Therefore be rul'd to doo as I doo teach. The Ape, that earst did nought but chill and quake, Now gan some courage unto him to take, And was content to attempt that enterprise, Tickled with glorie and rash covetise. But first gan question, whether should assay Those royall ornaments to steale away? Marie, that shall your selfe, quoth he theretoo, For ye be fine and nimble it to doo; Of all the beasts which in the forrests bee Is not a fitter for this turne than yee: Therefore, mine owne deare brother, take good hart, And ever thinke a kingdome is your part. Loath was the Ape, though praised, to adventer, Yet faintly gan into his worke to enter, Afraid of everie leafe that stir'd him by, And everie stick that underneath did ly: Upon his tiptoes nicely he up went, For making noyse, and still his eare he lent To everie sound that under heaven blew; Now went, now stopt, now crept, now backward drew, That it good sport had been him to have eyde. Yet at the last, so well he him applyde, Through his fine handling and cleanly play He all those royall signes had stolne away, And with the Foxes helpe them borne aside Into a secret corner unespide. Whither whenas they came they fell at words, Whether of them should be the lords of lords: For th'Ape was stryfull and ambicious, And the Foxe guilefull and most covetous; That neither pleased was to have the rayne Twixt them divided into even twaine, But either algates would be lords alone: For love and lordship bide no paragone. I am most worthie, said the Ape, sith I For it did put my life in ieopardie: Thereto I am in person and in stature Most like a man, the lord of everie creature, So that it seemeth I was made to raigne, And borne to be a kingly soveraigne. Nay, said the Foxe, Sir Ape, you are astray; For though to steale the diademe away Were the worke of your nimble hand, yet I Did first devise the plot by pollicie; So that it wholly springeth from my wit: For which also I claime my selfe more fit Than you to rule: for government of state Will without wisedome soone be ruinate. And where ye claime your selfe for outward shape Most like a man, man is not like an ape In his chiefe parts, that is, in wit and spirite; But I therein most like to him doo merite, For my slie wyles and subtill craftinesse, The title of the kingdome to possesse. Nath'les, my brother, since we passed are Unto this point, we will appease our iarre; And I with reason meete will rest content, That ye shall have both crowne and government, Upon condition that ye ruled bee In all affaires, and counselled by mee; And that ye let none other ever drawe Your minde from me, but keepe this as a lawe: And hereupon an oath unto me plight. The Ape was glad to end the strife so light, And thereto swore: for who would not oft sweare, And oft unsweare, a diademe to beare? Then freely up those royall spoyles he tooke, Yet at the Lyons skin he inly quooke; But it dissembled, and upon his head The crowne, and on his backe the skin, he did, And the false Foxe him helped to array. Then when he was all dight he tooke his way Into the forest, that he might be seene Of the wilde beasts in his new glory sheene. There the two first whome he encountred were The Sheepe and th'Asse, who, striken both with feare At sight of him, gan fast away to flye; But unto them the Foxe alowd did cry, And in the kings name bad them both to stay, Upon the payne that thereof follow may. Hardly naythles were they restrayned so, Till that the Foxe forth toward them did goe, And there disswaded them from needlease feare, For that the King did favour to them beare; And therefore dreadles bad them come to corte; For no wild beasts should do them any torte There or abroad, ne would his Maiestye Use them but well, with gracious clemencye, As whome he knew to him both fast and true. So he perswaded them with homage due Themselves to humble to the Ape prostrate, Who, gently to them bowing in his gate, Receyved them with chearefull entertayne. Thenceforth proceeding with his princely trayne, He shortly met the Tygre, and the Bore, Which with the simple Camell raged sore In bitter words, seeking to take occasion Upon his fleshly corpse to make invasion: But soone as they this mock-king did espy, Their troublous strife they stinted by and by, Thinking indeed that it the Lyon was. He then, to prove whether his powre would pas As currant, sent the Foxe to them streight way, Commaunding them their cause of strife bewray; And, if that wrong on eyther side there were, That he should warne the wronger to appeare The morrow next at court, it to defend; In the meane time upon the King t'attend. The subtile Foxe so well his message sayd, That the proud beasts him readily obayd: Whereby the Ape in wondrous stomack woxe, Strongly encorag'd by the crafty Foxe; That king indeed himselfe he shortly thought, And all the beasts him feared as they ought, And followed unto his palaice hye; Where taking cong, each one by and by Departed to his home in dreadfull awe, Full of the feared sight which late they sawe. The Ape, thus seized of the regall throne, Eftsones by counsell of the Foxe alone Gan to provide for all things in assurance, That so his rule might lenger have endurance. First, to his gate be pointed a strong gard, That none might enter but with issue hard: Then, for the safegard of his personage, He did appoint a warlike equipage Of forreine beasts, not in the forest bred, But part by land and part by water fed; For tyrannie is with strange ayde supported. Then unto him all monstrous beasts resorted Bred of two kindes, as Griffons, Minotaures, With those himselfe he strengthned mightelie, That feare he neede no force of enemie. Then gan he rule and tyrannize at will, Like as the Foxe did guide his graceles skill; And all wylde beasts made vassals of his pleasures, And with their spoyles enlarg'd his private treasures. No care of iustice, nor no rule of reason, No temperance, nor no regard of season, Did thenceforth ever enter in his minde; But crueltie, the signe of currish kinde, And sdeignfull pride, and wilfull arrogaunce; Such followes those whom fortune doth advaunce. But the false Foxe most kindly plaid his part: For whatsoever mother-wit or arte Could worke, he put in proofe: no practise slie, No counterpoint of cunning policie, Ne reach, no breach, that might him profit bring, But he the same did to his purpose wring. Nought suffered he the Ape to give or graunt, But through his hand must passe the fiaunt. All offices, all leases by him lept, And of them all whatso he likte he kept. Iustice he solde iniustice for to buy, And for to purchase for his progeny. Ill might it prosper that ill gotten was, But, so he got it, little did he pas. He fed his cubs with fat of all the soyle, And with the sweete of others sweating toyle; He crammed them with crumbs of benefices, And fild their mouthes with meeds of malefices; He cloathed them with all colours save white, And loded them with lordships and with might, So much as they were able well to beare, That with the weight their backs nigh broken were. He chaffred chayres in which churchmen were set, And breach of lawes to privie ferme did let. No statute so established might bee, Nor ordinaunce so needfull, but that hee Would violate, though not with violence, Yet under colour of the confidence The which the Ape repos'd in him alone, And reckned him the kingdomes corner stone. And ever, when he ought would bring to pas, His long experience the platforme was: And when he ought not pleasing would put by The cloke was care of thrift, and husbandry, For to encrease the common treasures store. But his owne treasure he encreased more, And lifted up his loftie towres thereby, That they began to threat the neighbour sky; The whiles the princes pallaces fell fast To ruine; for what thing can ever last? And whilest the other peeres for povertie Were forst their auncient houses to let lie, And their olde castles to the ground to fall, Which their forefathers famous over-all Had founded for the kingdomes ornament, And for their memories long moniment. But he no count made of nobilitie, Nor the wilde beasts whom armes did glorifie, The realmes chiefe strength and girlond of the crowne. All these through fained crimes he thrust adowne, Or made them dwell in darknes of disgrace: For none but whom he list might come in place. Of men of armes he had but small regard, But kept them lowe, and streigned verie hard. For men of learning little he esteemed; His wisedome he above their learning deemed. As for the rascall commons, least he cared, For not so common was his bountie shared: Let God, said he, if please, care for the manie, I for my selfe must care before els anie. So did he good to none, to manie ill, So did he all the kingdome rob and pill, Yet none durst speake, ne none durst of him plaine; So great he was in grace, and rich through game. Ne would he anie let to have accesse Unto the Prince, but by his owne addresse: For all that els did come were sure to faile; Yet would he further none but for availe. For on a time the Sheepe, to whom of yore The Foxe had promised of friendship store, What time the Ape the kingdome first did gaine, Came to the court, her case there to complaine; How that the Wolfe, her mortall enemie, Had sithence slaine her lambe most cruellie; And therefore crav'd to come unto the King, To let him knowe the order of the thing. Soft, Gooddie Sheepe! then said the Foxe, not soe: Unto the King so rash ye may not goe; He is with greater matter busied Than a lambe, or the lambes owne mothers hed. Ne certes may I take it well in part, That ye my cousin Wolfe so fowly thwart, And seeke with slaunder his good name to blot: For there was cause, els doo it he would not: Therefore surcease, good dame, and hence depart. So went the Sheepe away with heavie hart; So manie moe, so everie one was used, That to give largely to the boxe refused. Now when high Iove, in whose almightie hand The care of kings and power of empires stand, Sitting one day within his turret hye, From whence he vewes with his black-lidded eye Whatso the heaven in his wide vawte containes, And all that in the deepest earth remaines, And troubled kingdome of wilde beasts behelde, Whom not their kindly sovereigne did welde, But an usurping Ape, with guile suborn'd, Had all subverst, he sdeignfully it scorn'd In his great heart, and hardly did refraine But that with thunder bolts he had him slaine, And driven downe to hell, his dewest meed. But him avizing, he that dreadfull deed Forbore, and rather chose with scornfull shame Him to avenge, and blot his brutish name Unto the world, that never after anie Should of his race be voyd of infamie; And his false counsellor, the cause of all, To damne to death, or dole perpetuall, From whence he never should be quit nor stal'd. Forthwith he Mercurie unto him cal'd, And bad him flie with never-resting speed Unto the forrest, where wilde beasts doo breed, And, there enquiring privily, to learne What did of late chaunce to the Lyon stearne, That he rul'd not the empire, as he ought; And whence were all those plaints unto him brought Of wrongs and spoyles by salvage beasts committed: Which done, he bad the Lyon be remitted Into his seate, and those same treachours vile Be punished for their presumptuous guile. The sonne of Maia, soone as he receiv'd That word, streight with his azure wings he cleav'd The liquid clowdes and lucid firmament, Ne staid till that he came with steep descent Unto the place where his prescript did showe. There stouping, like an arrowe from a bowe, He soft arrived on the grassie plaine, And fairly paced forth with easie paine, Till that unto the pallace nigh he came. Then gan he to himselfe new shape to frame, And that faire face, and that ambrosiall hew, Which wonts to decke the gods immortall crew, And beautefie the shinie firmament, He doft, unfit for that rude rabblement. So, standing by the gates in strange disguize, He gan enquire of some in secret wize, Both of the King, and of his government, And of the Foxe, and his false blandishment: And evermore he heard each one complaine Of foule abuses both in realme and raine: Which yet to prove more true, he meant to see, And an ey-witnes of each thing to bee. Tho on his head his dreadfull hat he dight, Which maketh him invisible in sight, And mocketh th'eyes of all the lookers on, Making them thinke it but a vision. Through power of that he runnes through enemies swerds; Through power of that he passeth through the herds Of ravenous wilde beasts, and doth beguile Their greedie mouthes of the expected spoyle; Through power of that his cunning theeveries He wonts to worke, that none the same espies; And through the power of that he putteth on What shape he list in apparition. That on his head he wore, and in his hand He tooke caduceus, his snakie wand, With which the damned ghosts he governeth, And furies rules, and Tartare tempereth. With that he causeth sleep to seize the eyes, And feare the harts, of all his enemyes; And when him list, an universall night Throughout the world he makes on everie wight; As when his syre with Alcumena lay. Thus dight, into the court he tooke his way, Both through the gard, which never him descride, And through the watchmen, who him never spide: Thenceforth he past into each secrete part, Whereas he saw, that sorely griev'd his hart, Each place abounding with fowle iniuries, And fild with treasure rackt with robberies; Each place defilde with blood of guiltles beasts Which had been slaine to serve the Apes beheasts; Gluttonie, malice, pride, and covetize, And lawlesnes raigning with riotize; Besides the infinite extortions, Done through the Foxes great oppressions, That the complaints thereof could not be tolde. Which when he did with lothfull eyes beholde, He would no more endure, but came his way, And cast to seeke the Lion, where he may, That he might worke the avengement for this shame On those two caytives which had bred him blame And seeking all the forrest busily, At last he found where sleeping he did ly. The wicked weed which there the Foxe did lay From underneath his head he tooke away, And then him, waking, forced up to rize. The Lion, looking up, gan him avize, As one late in a traunce, what had of long Become of him: for fantasie is strong. Arise, said Mercurie, thou sluggish beast, That here liest senseles, like the corpse deceast, The whilste thy kingdome from thy head is rent, And thy throne royall with dishonour blent: Arise, and doo thy selfe redeeme from shame, And be aveng'd on those that breed thy blame. Thereat enraged, soone he gan upstart, Grinding his teeth, and grating his great hart; And, rouzing up himselfe, for his rough hide He gan to reach; but no where it espide. Therewith he gan full terribly to rore, And chafte at that indignitie right sore. But when his crowne and scepter both he wanted, Lord! how he fum'd, and sweld, and rag'd, and panted, And threatned death and thousand deadly dolours To them that had purloyn'd his princely honours. With that in hast, disroabed as he was, He toward his owne pallace forth did pas; And all the way he roared as he went, That all the forrest with astonishment Thereof did tremble, and the beasts therein Fled fast away from that so dreadfull din. At last he came unto his mansion, Where all the gates he found fast lockt anon And manie warders round about them stood: With that he roar'd alowd, as he were wood, That all the pallace quaked at the stound, As if it quite were riven from the ground, And all within were dead and hartles left; And th'Ape himselfe, as one whose wits were reft, Fled here and there, and everie corner sought. To hide himselfe from his owne feared thought. But the false Foxe, when he the Lion heard, Fled closely forth, streightway of death afeard, And to the Lion came, full lowly creeping, With fained face, and watrie eyne halfe weeping, T'excuse his former treason and abusion, And turning all unto the Apes confusion: Nath'les the royall beast forbore beleeving, But bad him stay at ease till further preeving. Then when he saw no entrance to him graunted, Roaring yet lowder that all harts it daunted, Upon those gates with force he fiercely newe, And, rending them in pieces, felly slewe Those warders strange, and all that els he met But th'Ape still flying he no where might get: From rowme to rowme, from beame to beame he fled, All breathles, and for feare now almost ded: Yet him at last the Lyon spide, and caught, And forth with shame unto his iudgement brought. Then all the beasts he causd' assembled bee, To heare their doome, and sad ensample see: The Foxe, first author of that treacherie He did uncase, and then away let flie. But th'Apes long taile which then he had he quight Cut off, and both eares pared of their hight; Since which, all Apes but halfe their eares have left, And of their tailes are utterlie bereft. So Mother Hubberd her discourse did end: Which pardon me if I amisse have pend, For weake was my remembrance it to hold, And bad her tongue that it so bluntly tolde. Ye heavenly spirites, whose ashie cinders lie Under deep ruines, with huge walls opprest, But not your praise, the which shall never die Through your faire verses, ne in ashes rest; If so be shrilling voyce of wight alive May reach from hence to depth of darkest hell, Then let those deep abysses open rive, That ye may understand my shreiking yell! Thrice having seene under the heavens veale Your toombs devoted compasse over all, Thrice unto you with lowd voyce I appeale, And for your antique furie here doo call, The whiles that I with sacred horror sing Your glorie, fairest of all earthly thing! Great Babylon her haughtie walls will praise, And sharped steeples high shot up in ayre; Greece will the olde Ephesian buildings blaze, And Nylus nurslings their Pyramidcs faire; The same yet vaunting Greece will tell the storie Of Ioves great image in Olympus placed; Mausolus worke will be the Carians glorie, And Crete will boast the Labyrinth, now raced; The antique Rhodian will likewise set forth The great Colosse, erect to Memorie; And what els in the world is of like worth, Some greater learned wit will magnifie. But I will sing above all moniments Seven Romane Hils, the worlds seven wonderments. Thou stranger, which for Rome in Rome hero seekest, And nought of Rome in Rome perceiv'st at all, These same olde walls, olde arches, which thou seest, Olde palaces, is that which Rome men call. Beholde what wreake, what mine, and what wast, And how that she which with her mightie powre Tam'd all the world hath tam'd herselfe at last; The pray of Time, which all things doth devowre! Rome now of Rome is th'onely funerall, And onely Rome of Rome hath victorie; Ne ought save Tyber hastning to his fall Remaines of all: O worlds inconstancie! That which is firme doth flit and fall away, And that is flitting doth abide and stay. She whose high top above the starres did sore, One foote on Thetis, th'other on the Morning, One hand on Scythia, th'other on the More, Both heaven and earth in roundnesse compassing; Iove fearing, least if she should greater growe, The old giants should once againe uprise, Her whelm'd with hills, these seven hils, which be nowe Tombes of her greatnes which did threate the skies: Upon her head he heapt Mount Saturnal, Upon her bellie th'antique Palatine, Upon her stomacke laid Mount Quirinal, On her left hand the noysome Esquiline, And Caelian on the right; but both her feete Mount Viminal and Aventine doo meete. Who lists to see what ever nature, arte, And heaven could doo, O Rome, thee let him see, In case thy greatnes he can gesse in harte By that which but the picture is of thee! Rome is no more: but if the shade of Rome May of the bodie yeeld a seeming sight, It's like a corse drawne forth out of the tombe By magicke skill out of eternall night: The corpes of Rome in ashes is entombed, And her great spirite, reioyned to the spirite Of this great masse, is in the same enwombed; But her brave writings, which, her famous merite In spight of Time out of the dust doth reare, Doo make her idole through the world appeare. Such as the Berecynthian goddesse bright, In her swifte charret with high turrets crownde, Proud that so manie gods she brought to light, Such was this citie in her good daies fownd: This citie, more than that great Phrygian mother Renowm'd for fruite of famous progenie, Whose greatnes by the greatnes of none other, But by her selfe, her equall match could see: Rome onely might to Rome compared bee, And onely Rome could make great Rome to tremble: So did the gods by heavenly doome decree, That other earthlie power should not resemble Her that did match the whole earths puissaunce, And did her courage to the heavens advaunce. Ye sacred ruines, and ye tragick sights, Which onely doo the name of Rome retaine, Olde moniments, which of so famous sprights The honour yet in ashes doo maintaine, Triumphant arcks, spyres neighbours to the skie, That you to see doth th'heaven it selfe appall, Alas! by little ye to nothing flie, The peoples fable, and the spoyle of all! And though your frames do for a time make warre Gainst Time, yet Time in time shall ruinate Your workes and names, and your last reliques marre. My sad desires, rest therefore moderate! For if that Time make ende of things so sure, It als will end the paine which I endure. Through armes and vassals Rome the world subdu'd, That one would weene that one sole cities strength Both land and sea in roundnes had survew'd, To be the measure of her bredth and length: This peoples vertue yet so fruitfull was Of vertuous nephewes , that posteritie, Striving in power their grandfathers to passe, The lowest earth ioin'd to the heaven hie; To th'end that, having all parts in their power, Nought from the Romane Empire might be quight ; And that though Time doth commonwealths devowre, Yet no time should so low embase their hight, That her head, earth'd in her foundations deep, Should not her name and endles honour keep. Ye cruell starres, and eke ye gods unkinde, Heaven envious, and bitter stepdame Nature! Be it by fortune, or by course of kinde , That ye doo weld th'affaires of earthlie creature; Why have your hands long sithence traveiled To frame this world, that doth endure so long? Or why were not these Romane palaces Made of some matter no lesse firme and strong? I say not, as the common voyce doth say, That all things which beneath the moone have being Are temporall and subiect to decay: But I say rather, though not all agreeing With some that weene the contrarie in thought, That all this whole shall one day come to nought. As that brave sonne of Aeson, which by charmes Atcheiv'd the golden fleece in Colchid land, Out of the earth engendred men of armes Of dragons teeth, sowne in the sacred sand, So this brave towne, that in her youthlie daies An hydra was of warriours glorious, Did fill with her renowmed nourslings praise The firie sunnes both one and other hous: But they at last, there being then not living An Hercules so ranke seed to represse, Emongst themselves with cruell furie striving, Mow'd downe themselves with slaughter mercilesse; Renewing in themselves that rage unkinde, Which whilom did those earthborn brethren blinde. Mars, shaming to have given so great head To his off-spring, that mortall puissaunce, Puft up with pride of Romane hardiehead, Seem'd above heavens powre it selfe to advaunce, Cooling againe his former kindled heate With which he had those Romane spirits fild. Did blowe new fire, and with enflamed breath Into the Gothicke colde hot rage instil'd. Then gan that nation, th'earths new giant brood, To dart abroad the thunderbolts of warre, And, beating downe these walls with furious mood Into her mothers bosome, all did marre; To th'end that none, all were it love his sire, Should boast himselfe of the Romane empire. Like as whilome the children of the earth Heapt hils on hils to scale the starrie skie, And fight against the gods of heavenly berth, Whiles Iove at them his thunderbolts let flie; All suddenly with lightning overthrowne, The furious squadrons downe to ground did fall, That th'earth under her childrens weight did grone, And th'heavens in glorie triumpht over all; So did that haughtie front, which heaped was On these seven Romane hils, it selfe upreare Over the world, and lift her loftie face Against the heaven, that gan her force to feare. But now these scorned fields bemone her fall, And gods secure feare not her force at all. Nor the swift furie of the flames aspiring, Nor the deep wounds of victours raging blade, Nor ruthlesse spoyle of souldiers blood-desiring, The which so oft thee, Rome, their conquest made, Ne stroke on stroke of fortune variable, Ne rust of age hating continuance, Nor wrath of gods, nor spight of men unstable, Nor thou oppos'd against thine owne puissance, Nor th'horrible uprore of windes high blowing, Nor swelling streames of that god snakie-paced Which hath so often with his overflowing Thee drenched, have thy pride so much abaced, But that this nothing, which they have thee left, Makes the world wonder what they from thee reft. As men in summer fearles passe the foord Which is in winter lord of all the plaine, And with his tumbling streames doth beare aboord The ploughmans hope and shepheards labour vaine, And as the coward beasts use to despise The noble lion after his lives end, Whetting their teeth, and with vaine foolhardise Daring the foe that cannot him defend, Did brave about the corpes of Hector colde, So those which whilome wont with pallid cheekes The Romane triumphs glorie to behold, Now on these ashie tombes shew boldnesse vaine, And, conquer'd, dare the conquerour disdaine. Ye pallid spirits, and ye ashie ghoasts, Which, ioying in the brightnes of your day, Brought foorth those signes of your presumptuous boasts Which now their dusty reliques do bewray, Tell me, ye spirits! sith the darksome river Of Styx, not passable to soules returning, Enclosing you in thrice three wards for ever, Doo not restraine your images still mourning, Tell me then, for perhaps some one of you Yet here above him secretly doth hide, Doo ye not feele your torments to accrewe, When ye sometimes behold the ruin'd pride Of these old Romane works, built with your hands, To become nought els but heaped sands? Like as ye see the wrathfull sea from farre In a great mountaine heap't with hideous noyse, Eftsoones of thousand billowes shouldred narre , Against a rocke to breake with dreadfull poyse; Like as ye see fell Boreas with sharpe blast Tossing huge tempests through the troubled skie, Eftsoones having his wide wings spent in wast, To stop his wearie cariere suddenly; And as ye see huge flames spred diverslie, Gathered in one up to the heavens to spyre, Eftsoones consum'd to fall downe feebily, So whilom did this monarchie aspyre As waves, as winde, as fire, spred over all, Till it by fatall doome adowne did fall. So long as Ioves great bird did make his flight, Bearing the fire with which heaven doth us fray, Heaven had not feare of that presumptuous might, With which the giaunts did the gods assay: But all so soone as scortching sunne had brent His wings which wont the earth to overspredd, The earth out of her massie wombe forth sent That antique horror which made heaven adredd. Then was the Germane raven in disguise That Romane eagle seene to cleave asunder, And towards heaven freshly to arise Out of these mountaines, now consum'd to pouder. In which the foule that serves to beare the lightning Is now no more seen flying nor alighting. These heapes of stones, these old wals which ye see, Were first enclosures but of salvage soyle; And these brave pallaces, which maystred bee Of time, were shepheards cottages somewhile. Then tooke the shepheards kingly ornaments And the stout hynde arm'd his right hand with steele: Eftsoones their rule of yearely presidents Grew great, and sixe months greater a great deele; Which, made perpetuall, rose to so great might, That thence th'imperiall eagle rooting tooke, Till th'heaven it selfe, opposing gainst her might, Her power to Peters successor betooke, Who, shepheardlike, as Fates the same foreseeing, Doth shew that all things turne to their first being. All that is perfect, which th'heaven beautefies; All that's imperfect, borne belowe the moone; All that doth feede our spirits and our eies; And all that doth consume our pleasures soone; All the mishap the which our daies outweares; All the good hap of th'oldest times afore, Rome, in the time of her great ancesters, Like a Pandora, locked long in store. But destinie this huge chaos turmoyling, In which all good and evill was enclosed, Their heavenly vertues from these woes assoyling, Caried to heaven, from sinfull bondage losed: But their great sinnes, the causers of their paine, Under these antique ruines yet remaine. No otherwise than raynie cloud, first fed With earthly vapours gathered in the ayre, Eftsoones in compas arch't, to steepe his hed, Doth plonge himselfe in Tethys bosome faire, And, mounting up againe from whence he came, With his great bellie spreds the dimmed world, Till at the last, dissolving his moist frame, In raine, or snowe, or haile, he forth is horld, This citie, which was first but shepheards shade, Uprising by degrees, grewe to such height That queene of land and sea her selfe she made. At last, not able to beare so great weight, Her power, disperst, through all the world did vade ; To shew that all in th'end to nought shall fade. The same which Pyrrhus and the puissaunce Of Afrike could not tame, that same brave citie Which, with stout courage arm'd against mischaunce, Sustein'd the shocke of common enmitie, Long as her ship, tost with so manie freakes, Had all the world in armes against her bent, Was never seene that anie fortunes wreakes Could breake her course begun with brave intent. But, when the obiect of her vertue failed, Her power it selfe against it selfe did arme; As he that having long in tempest sailed Faine would arive, but cannot for the storme, If too great winde against the port him drive, Doth in the port it selfe his vessell rive. When that brave honour of the Latine name, Which mear'd her rule with Africa and Byze , With Thames inhabitants of noble fame, And they which see the dawning day arize, Her nourslings did with mutinous uprore Harten against her selfe, her conquer'd spoile, Which she had wonne from all the world afore, Of all the world was spoyl'd within a while: So, when the compast course of the universe In sixe and thirtie thousand yeares is ronne, The bands of th'elements shall backe reverse To their first discord, and be quite undonne; The seedes of which all things at first were bred Shall in great Chaos wombe againe be hid. O warie wisedome of the man that would That Carthage towres from spoile should be forborne, To th'end that his victorious people should With cancring laisure not be overworne! He well foresaw how that the Romane courage, Impatient of pleasures faint desires, Through idlenes would turne to civill rage, And be her selfe the matter of her fires. For in a people given all to ease, Ambition is engendred easily; As, in a vicious bodie, grose disease Soone growes through humours superfluitie. That came to passe, when, swolne with plenties pride, Nor prince, nor peere, nor kin, they would abide. If the blinde Furie which warres breedeth oft Wonts not t'enrage the hearts of equall beasts, Whether they fare on foote, or flie aloft, Or armed be with clawes, or scalie creasts, What fell Erynnis, with hot burning tongs, Did grype your hearts with noysome rage imbew'd, That, each to other working cruell wrongs, Your blades in your owne bowels you embrew'd? Was this, ye Romanes, your hard destinie? Or some old sinne, whose unappeased guilt Powr'd vengeance forth on you eternallie? Or brothers blood, the which at first was spilt Upon your walls, that God might not endure Upon the same to set foundation sure? O that I had the Thracian poets harpe, For to awake out of th'infernall shade Those antique Caesars, sleeping long in darke, The which this auncient citie whilome made! Or that I had Amphions instrument, To quicken with his vitall notes accord The stonie ioynts of these old walls now rent, By which th'Ausonian light might be restor'd! Or that at least I could with pencill fine Fashion the pourtraicts of these palacis, By paterne of great Virgils spirit divine! I would assay with that which in me is To builde, with levell of my loftie style, That which no hands can evermore compyle. Who list the Romane greatnes forth to figure, Him needeth not to seeke for usage right Of line, or lead, or rule, or squaire, to measure Her length, her breadth, her deepnes, or her hight; But him behooves to vew in compasse round All that the ocean graspes in his long armes; Be it where the yerely starre doth scortch the ground, Or where colde Boreas blowes his bitter stormes. Rome was th'whole world, and al the world was Rome; And if things nam'd their names doo equalize, When land and sea ye name, then name ye Rome, And, naming Rome, ye land and sea comprize: For th'auncient plot of Rome, displayed plaine, The map of all the wide world doth containe. Thou that at Rome astonisht dost behold The antique pride which menaced the skie, These haughtie heapes, these palaces of olde, These wals, these arcks, these baths, these temples his, Iudge, by these ample ruines vew, the rest The which iniurious time hath quite outworne, Since, of all workmen helde in reckning best, Yet these olde fragments are for paternes borne: Then also marke how Rome, from day to day, Repayring her decayed fashion, Renewes herselfe with buildings rich and gay; That one would iudge that the Romaine Daemon Doth yet himselfe with fatall hand enforce Againe on foot to reare her pouldred corse. He that hath seene a great oke drie and dead, Yet clad with reliques of some trophees olde, Lifting to heaven her aged hoarie head, Whose foote in ground hath left but feeble holde, But halfe disbowel'd lies above the ground, Shewing her wreathed rootes, and naked armes, And on her trunke all rotten and unsound Onely supports herselfe for meate of wormes, And, though she owe her fall to the first winde, Yet of the devout people is ador'd, And manie yong plants spring out of her rinde; Who such an oke hath seene, let him record That such this cities honour was of yore, And mongst all cities florished much more. All that which Greece their temples to embrave, After th'Ionicke, Atticke, Doricke guise, Or Corinth skil'd in curious workes to grave, All that Lysippus practike arte could forme, Apelles wit, or Phidias his skill, Was wont this auncient citie to adorne, And the heaven it selfe with her wide wonders fill. All that which Athens ever brought forth wise, All that which Afrike ever brought forth strange, All that which Asie ever had of prise, Was here to see. O mervelous great change! Rome, living, was the worlds sole ornament; And, dead, is now the worlds sole moniment. Like as the seeded field greene grasse first showes, Then from greene grasse into a stalke doth spring, And from a stalke into an eare forth-growes, Which eare the frutefull graine doth shortly bring, And as in season due the husband mowes The waving lockes of those faire yeallow heares, Which, bound in sheaves, and layd in comely rowes, Upon the naked fields in stalkes he reares, So grew the Romane empire by degree, Till that barbarian hands it quite did spill, And left of it but these olde markes to see, Of which all passers by doo somewhat pill , As they which gleane, the reliques use to gather Which th'husbandman behind him chanst to scater. That same is now nought but a champian wide, Where all this worlds pride once was situate. No blame to thee, whosoever dost abide Ne Afrike thereof guiltie is, nor Spaine, Nor the bolde people by the Thamis brincks, Nor the brave warlicke brood of Alemaine, Nor the borne souldier which Rhine running drinks. Thou onely cause, O Civill Furie, art! Which, sowing in th'Aemathian fields thy spight, Didst arme thy hand against thy proper hart; To th'end that when thou wast in greatest hight To greatnes growne, through long prosperitie, Thou then adowne might'st fall more horriblie. Hope ye, my Verses, that posteritie Of age ensuing shall you ever read? Hope ye that ever immortalitie So meane harpes worke may chalenge for her meed? If under heaven anie endurance were, These moniments, which not in paper writ, But in porphyre and marble doo appeare, Might well have hop'd to have obtained it. Nath'les, my Lute, whom Phoebus deigned to give, Cease not to sound these olde antiquities: For if that Time doo let thy glorie live, Well maist thou boast, how ever base thou bee, That thou art first which of thy nation song Th'olde honour of the people gowned long. Bellay, first garland of free poesie That France brought forth, though fruitfull of brave wits, Well worthie thou of immortalitie, That long hast traveld , by thy learned writs, Olde Rome out of her ashes to revive, And give a second life to dead decayes! Needes must he all eternitie survive, That can to other give eternall dayes. Thy dayes therefore are endles, and thy prayse Excelling all that ever went before: And, after thee, gins Bartas hie to rayse His heavenly Muse, th'Almightie to adore. Live happie spirits, th'honour of your name, And fill the world with never dying fame! Most brave and bountifull La: for so excellent favours as I have received at your sweet handes, to offer these fewe leaves as in I sing of deadly dolorous debate, Stir'd up through wrathful! Nemesis despight, Betwixt two mightie ones of great estate, Drawne into armes and proofe of mortall fight Through prowd ambition and hart-swelling hate, Whilest neither could the others greater might And sdeignfull scorne endure; that from small iarre Their wraths at length broke into open warre. The roote whereof and tragicall effect, Vouchsafe, O thou the mournfulst Muse of nyne, That wontst the tragick stage for to direct, In funerall complaints and waylfull tyne Reveale to me, and all the meanes detect Through which sad Clarion did at last declyne To lowest wretchednes: And is there then Such rancour in the harts of mightie men? Of all the race of silver-winged flies Which doo possesse the empire of the aire, Betwixt the centred earth and azure skies Was none more favourable nor more faire, Whilst heaven did favour his felicities, Then Clarion, the eldest sonne and haire Of Muscaroll, and in his fathers sight Of all alive did seeme the fairest wight. With fruitfull hope his aged breast he fed Of future good, which his yong toward yeares, Full of brave courage and bold hardyhed Above th'ensample of his equall peares, Did largely promise, and to him fore-red, Whilst oft his heart did melt in tender teares, That he in time would sure prove such an one, As should be worthie of his fathers throne. The fresh yong flie, in whom the kindly fire Of lustfull yongth began to kindle fast, Did much disdaine to subiect his desire To loathsome sloth, or houres in ease to wast; But ioy'd to range abroad in fresh attire Through the wide compas of the ayrie coast, And with unwearied wings each part t'inquire Of the wide rule of his renownned sire. For he so swift and nimble was of flight, That from this lower tract he dar'd to stie Up to the clowdes, and thence with pineons light To mount aloft unto the christall skie, To vew the workmanship of heavens hight Whence down descending he along would flie Upon the streaming rivers, sport to finde, And oft would dare to tempt the troublous winde. So on a summers day, when season milde With gentle calme the world had quieted, And high in heaven Hyperions fierie childe Ascending did his beames abroad dispred, Whiles all the heavens on lower creatures smilde, Yong Clarion, with vauntfull lustiehead; After his guize did cast abroad to fare, And theretoo gan his furnitures prepare. His breastplate first, that was of substance pure, Before his noble heart he firmely bound, That mought his life from yron death assure, And ward his gentle corpes from cruell wound: For it by arte was framed to endure The bit of balefull steele and bitter stownd , No lesse than that which Vulcane made to sheild Achilles life from fate of Troyan field. And then about his shoulders broad he threw An hairie hide of some wilde beast, whom hee In salvage forrest by adventure slew, And reft the spoyle his ornament to bee; Which, spredding all his backe with dreadfull vew, Made all that him so horrible did see Thinke him Alcides with the lyons skin, When the Naeman conquest he did win. Upon his head, his glistering burganet , The which was wrought by wonderous device And curiously engraven, he did set: The mettall was of rare and passing price; Not Bilbo steele, nor brasse from Corinth fet, Nor costly oricalche from strange Phoenice; But such as could both Phoebus arrowes ward, And th'hayling darts of heaven beating hard. Therein two deadly weapons fixt he bore, Strongly outlaunced towards either side, Like two sharpe speares, his enemies to gore: Like as a warlike brigandine, applyde To fight, layes forth her threatfull pikes afore, The engines which in them sad death doo hyde, So did this flie outstretch his fearefull hornes, Yet so as him their terrour more adornes. Lastly his shinie wings, as silver bright, Painted with thousand colours passing farre All painters skill, he did about him dight: Not halfe so manie sundrie colours arre In Iris bowe; ne heaven doth shine so bright, Distinguished with manie a twinckling starre; Nor Iunoes bird, in her ey-spotted traine, So manie goodly colours doth containe. Ne may it be withouten perill spoken The Archer-god, the sonne of Cytheree, That ioyes on wretched lovers to be wroken , And heaped spoyles of bleeding harts to see, Beares in his wings so manie a changefull token. Ah! my liege Lord, forgive it unto mee, If ought against thine honour I have tolde; Yet sure those wings were fairer manifolde. Full many a ladie faire, in court full oft Beholding them, him secretly envide, And wisht that two such fannes, so silken soft And golden faire, her Love would her provide; Or that, when them the gorgeous flie had doft, Some one that would with grace be gratifide From him would steale them privily away, And bring to her so precious a pray. Report is that Dame Venus on a day, In spring when flowres doo clothe the fruitful ground, Walking abroad with all her nymphes to play, Bad her faire damzels flocking her arownd To gather flowres, her forhead to array. Emongst the rest a gentle nymph was found, Hight Astery, excelling all the crewe In curteous usage and unstained hewe. Who, being nimbler ioynted than the rest, And more industrious, gathered more store Of the fields honour than the others best; Which they in secret harts envying sore, Tolde Venus, when her as the worthiest She praisd', that Cupide as they heard before Did lend her secret aide in gathering Into her lap the children of the Spring, Whereof the goddesse gathering iealous feare, Not yet unmindfull how not long agoe Her sonne to Psyche secrete love did beare, And long it close conceal'd, till mickle woe Thereof arose, and manie a rufull teare, Reason with sudden rage did overgoe; And, giving hastie credit to th'accuser, Was led away of them that did abuse her. Eftsoones that damzel by her heavenly might She turn'd into a winged butterflie, In the wide aire to make her wandring flight; And all those flowres, with which so plenteouslie Her lap she filled had, that bred her spight, She placed in her wings, for memorie Of her pretended crime, though crime none were: Since which that flie them in her wings doth beare. Thus the fresh Clarion, being readie dight, Unto his iourney did himselfe addresse, And with good speed began to take his flight: Over the fields, in his franke lustinesse; And all the champion he soared light; And all the countrey wide he did possesse, Feeding upon their pleasures bounteouslie, That none gainsaid, nor none did him envie. The woods, the rivers, and the medowes green. With his aire-cutting wings he measured wide, Ne did he leave the mountaines bare unseene, Nor the ranke grassie fennes delights untride. But none of these, how ever sweete they beene, Mote please his fancie nor him cause t'abide: His choicefull sense with everie change doth flit; No common things may please a wavering wit. To the gay gardins his unstaid desire Him wholly caried, to refresh his sprights: There lavish Nature, in her best attire, Powres forth sweete odors and alluring sights; And Arte, with her contending, doth aspire T'excell the naturall with made delights: And all that faire or pleasant may be found In riotous excesse doth there abound. There he arriving round about doth flie, From bed to bed, from one to other border; And takes survey, with curious busie eye, Of every flowre and herbe there set in order; Now this, now that, he tasteth tenderly, Yet none of them he rudely doth disorder, Ne with his feete their silken leaves deface, But pastures on the pleasures of each place. And evermore with most varietie, And change of sweetnesse, for all change is sweete, He casts his glutton sense to satisfie; Now sucking of the sap of herbe most meete, Or of the deaw which yet on them does lie, Now in the same bathing his tender feete: And then he pearcheth on some braunch thereby, To weather him, and his moyst wings to dry. And then againe he turneth to his play, To spoyle the pleasures of that paradise; The wholsome saulge , and lavender still gray, Ranke-smelling rue, and cummin good for eyes, The roses raigning in the pride of May, Sharpe isope, good for greene wounds remedies, Faire marigoldes, and bees-alluring thime, Sweete marioram, and daysies decking prime: Coole violets, and orpine growing still, Embathed balme, and chearfull galingale, Fresh costmarie, and breathfull camomill, Dull poppie, and drink-quickning setuale , Veyne-healing verven, and hed-purging dill, Sound savorie, and bazil hartie-hale, Fat colworts, and comfrting perseline , Colde lettuce, and refreshing rosmarine. And whatso else of vertue good or ill Grewe in this gardin, fetcht from farre away, Of everie one he takes and tastes at will, And on their pleasures greedily doth pray. Then when he hath both plaid, and fed his fill, In the warme sunne he doth himselfe embay , And there him rests in riotous suffisaunce Of all his gladfulnes and kingly ioyaunce. What more felicitie can fall to creature Than to enioy delight with libertie, And to be lord of all the workes of Nature, To raine in th'aire from earth to highest skie, To feed on flowres and weeds of glorious feature, To take whatever thing doth please the eie? Who rests not pleased with such happines, Well worthie he to taste of wretchednes. But what on earth can long abide in state? Or who can him assure of happie day? Sith morning faire may bring fowle evening late, And least mishap the most blisse alter may! For thousand perills lie in close awaite About us daylie, to worke our decay; That none, except a God, or God him guide, May them avoyde, or remedie provide. And whatso heavens in their secret doome Ordained have, how can fraile fleshly wight Forecast, but it must needs to issue come? The sea, the aire, the fire, the day, the night, And th'armies of their creatures, all and some , Do serve to them, and with importune might Warre against us, the vassals of their will. Who then can save what they dispose to spill? Not thou, O Clarion, though fairest thou Of all thy kinde, unhappie happie flie, Whose cruell fate is woven even now Of loves owne hand, to worke thy miserie! Ne may thee helpe the manie hartie vow, Which thy olde sire with sacred pietie Hath powred forth for thee, and th'altars sprent Nought may thee save from heavens avengment! It fortuned as heavens had behight That in this gardin where yong Clarion Was wont to solace him, a wicked wight, The foe of faire things, th'author of confusion, The shame of Nature, the bondslave of spight, Had lately built his hatefull mansion; And, lurking closely, in awayte now lay, How he might anie in his trap betray. But when he spide the ioyous butterflie In this faire plot dispacing too and fro, Fearles of foes and hidden ieopardie, Lord! how he gan for to bestirre him tho, And to his wicked worke each part applie! His heart did earne against his hated foe, And bowels so with rankling poyson swelde, That scarce the skin the strong contagion helde. The cause why he this flie so maliced Was as in stories it is written found For that his mother which him bore and bred, The most fine-fingred workwoman on ground, Arachne, by his meanes was vanquished Of Pallas, and in her owne skill confound , When she with her for excellence contended, That wrought her shame, and sorrow never ended. For the Tritonian goddesse, having hard Her blazed fame, which all the world had fil'd, Came downe to prove the truth, and due reward For her prais-worthie workmanship to yeild: But the presumptuous damzel rashly dar'd The goddesse selfe to chalenge to the field, And to compare with her in curious skill Of workes with loome, with needle, and with quill. Minerva did the chalenge not refuse, But deign'd with her the paragon to make: So to their worke they sit, and each doth chuse What storie she will for her tapet take. Arachne figur'd how love did abuse Europa like a bull, and on his backe Her through the sea did beare; so lively@ seene, That it true sea and true bull ye would weene. Shee seem'd still backe unto the land to looke, And her play-fellowes aide to call, and feare The dashing of the waves, that up she tooke Her daintie feete, and garments gathered neare: But Lord! how she in everie member shooke, When as the land she saw no more appeare, But a wilde wildernes of waters deepe: Then gan she greatly to lament and weepe. Before the bull she pictur'd winged Love, With his yong brother Sport, light fluttering Upon the waves, as each had been a dove; The one his bowe and shafts, the other spring A burning teade about his head did move, As in their syres new love both triumphing; And manie Nymphes about them flocking round, And manie Tritons which their homes did sound. And round about her-worke she did empale With a faire border wrought of sundrie flowres, Enwoven with an yviewinding trayle: A goodly worke, full fit for kingly bowres, Such as Dame Pallas, such as Envie pale, That al good things with venemous tooth devowres, Could not accuse. Then gan the goddesse bright Her selfe likewise unto her worke to dight. She made the storie of the olde debate Which she with Neptune did for Athens trie: Twelve gods doo sit around in royall state, And love in midst with awfull maiestie, To iudge the strife betweene them stirred late: Each of the gods by his like visnomie Eathe to be knowen; but love above them all, By his great lookes and power imperiall. Before them stands the god of seas in place, Clayming that sea-coast citie as his right, And strikes the rockes with his three-forked mace; Whenceforth issues a warlike steed in sight, The signe by which he chalengeth the place; That all the gods which saw his wondrous might Did surely deeme the victorie his due: But seldom seene, foreiudgement proveth true. Then to herselfe she gives her Aegide shield, And steel-hed speare, and morion on her hedd, Such as she oft is seene in warlicke field: Then sets she forth, how with her weapon dredd She smote the ground, the which streight foorth did yield A fruitfull olyve tree, with berries spredd, That all the gods admir'd; then all the storie She compast with a wreathe of olyves hoarie. Emongst those leaves she made a butterflie, With excellent device and wondrous slight, Fluttring among the olives wantonly, That seem'd to live, so like it was in sight: The velvet nap which on his wings doth lie, The silken downe with which his backe is dight, His broad outstretched homes, his hayrie thies, His glorious colours, and his glistering eies. Which when Arachne saw, as overlaid And mastered with workmanship so rare, She stood astonied long, ne ought gainesaid; And with fast fixed eyes on her did stare, And by her silence, signe of one dismaid, The victorie did yeeld her as her share; Yet did she inly fret and felly burne, And all her blood to poysonous rancor turne: That shortly from the shape of womanhed, Such as she was when Pallas she attempted, She grew to hideous shape of dryrihed , Pined with griefe of follie late repented: Eftsoones her white streight legs were altered To crooked crawling shankes, of marrowe empted, And her faire face to foule and loathsome hewe, And her fine corpes to a bag of venim grewe. This cursed creature, mindfull of that olde Enfestred grudge the which his mother felt, So soone as Clarion he did beholde, His heart with vengefull malice inly swelt; And weaving straight a net with mame a folde About the cave in which he lurking dwelt, With fine small cords about it stretched wide, So finely sponne that scarce they could be spide, Not anie damzell which her vaunteth most In skilfull knitting of soft silken twyne, Nor anie weaver, which his worke doth boast In dieper, in damaske, or in lyne , Nor anie skil'd in workmanship embost, Nor anie skil'd in loupes of fingring fine, Might in their divers cunning ever dare With this so curious networks to compare. Ne doo I thinke that that same subtil gin The which the Lemnian god framde craftilie, Mars sleeping with his wife to compasse in, That all the gods with common mockerie Might laugh at them, and scorne their shamefull sin, Was like to this. This same he did applie For to entrap the careles Clarion, That rang'd each where without suspition. Suspition of friend, nor feare of foe, That hazarded his health, had he at all, But walkt at will, and wandred too and fro, In the pride of his freedome principall : Litle wist he his fatall future woe, But was secure; the liker he to fall. He likest is to fall into mischaunce, That is regardles of his governaunce. Yet still Aragnoll so his foe was hight Lay lurking covertly him to surprise; And all his gins, that him entangle might, Drest in good order as he could devise. At length the foolish flie, without foresight, As he that did all daunger quite despise, Toward those parts came flying careleslie, Where hidden was his hatefull enemie. Who, seeing him, with secret ioy therefore Did tickle inwardly in everie vaine; And his false hart, fraught with all treasons store, Was fil'd with hope his purpose to obtaine: Himselfe he close upgathered more and more Into his den, that his deceiptfull traine By his there being might not be bewraid, Ne anie noyse, ne anie motion made. Like as a wily foxe, that, having spide Where on a sunnie banke the lambes doo play, Full closely creeping by the hinder side, Lyes in ambushment of his hoped pray, Ne stirreth limbe, till, seeing readie tide , He rusheth forth, and snatcheth quite away One of the litle yonglings unawares; So to his worke Aragnoll him prepares. Who now shall give unto my heavie eyes A well of teares, that all may overflow? Or where shall I finde lamentable cryes, And mournfull tunes enough my griefe to show? Helpe, O thou Tragick Muse, me to devise Notes sad enough, t'expresse this bitter throw: For loe, the drerie stownd is now arrived, That of all happines hath us deprived. The luckles Clarion, whether cruell Fate Or wicked Fortune faultles him misled, Or some ungracious blast out of the gate Of Aeoles raine perforce him drove on hed , Was O sad hap and howre unfortunate! With violent swift flight forth caried Into the cursed cobweb, which his foe Had framed for his finall overthroe. There the fond flie, entangled, strugled long, Himselfe to free thereout; but all in vaine. For, striving more, the more in laces strong Himselfe he tide, and wrapt his wings twaine In lymie snares the subtill loupes among; That in the ende he breathelesse did remaine, And, all his yongthly forces idly spent, Him to the mercie of th'avenger lent. Which when the greisly tyrant did espie, Like a grimme lyon rushing with fierce might Out of his den, he seized greedelie On the resistles pray, and, with fell spight, Under the left wing stroke his weapon slie Into his heart, that his deepe-groning spright In bloodie streames foorth fled into the aire, His bodie left the spectacle of care. One day, whiles that my daylie cares did sleepe, My spirit, shaking off her earthly prison, Began to enter into meditation deepe Of things exceeding reach of common reason; Such as this age, in which all good is geason , And all that humble is and meane debaced, Hath brought forth in her last declining season, Griefe of good mindes, to see goodnesse disgraced! On which when as my thought was throghly@ placed, Unto my eyes strange showes presented were, Picturing that which I in minde embraced, That yet those sights empassion$ me full nere. Such as they were, faire Ladie%, take in worth, That when time serves may bring things better forth. In summers day, when Phoebus fairly shone, I saw a Bull as white as driven snowe, With gilden homes embowed like the moone, In a fresh flowring meadow lying lowe: Up to his eares the verdant grasse did growe, And the gay floures did offer to be eaten; But he with fatnes so did overflows, That he all wallowed in the weedes downe beaten, Ne car'd with them his daintie lips to sweeten: Till that a Brize , a scorned little creature, Through his faire hide his angrie sting did threaten, And vext so sore, that all his goodly feature And all his plenteous pasture nought him pleased: So by the small the great is oft diseased . Beside the fruitfull shore of muddie Nile, Upon a sunnie banke outstretched lay, In monstrous length, a mightie Crocodile, That, cram'd with guiltles blood and greedie pray Of wretched people travailing that way, Thought all things lesse than his disdainfull pride. I saw a little Bird, cal'd Tedula, The least of thousands which on earth abide, That forst this hideous beast to open wide The greisly gates of his devouring hell, And let him feede, as Nature doth provide, Upon his iawes, that with blacke venime swell. Why then should greatest things the least disdaine, Sith that so small so mightie can constraine? The kingly bird that beares Ioves thunder-clap One day did scorne the simple Scarabee , Proud of his highest service and good hap, That made all other foules his thralls to bee. The silly flie, that no redresse did see, Spide where the Eagle built his towring nest, And, kindling fire within the hollow tree, Burnt up his yong ones, and himselfe distrest; Ne suffred him in anie place to rest, But drove in Ioves owne lap his egs to lay; Where gathering also filth him to infest, Forst with the filth his egs to fling away: For which, when as the foule was wroth, said Iove, Lo! how the least the greatest may reprove. Toward the sea turning my troubled eye, I saw the fish if fish I may it cleepe That makes the sea before his face to flye, And with his flaggie finnes doth seeme to sweepe The fomie waves out of the dreadfull deep; The huge Leviathan, dame Natures wonder, Making his sport, that manie makes to weep. A Sword-fish small him from the rest did sunder That, in his throat him pricking softly under, His wide abysse him forced forth to spewe, That all the sea did roare like heavens thunder, And all the waves were stain'd with filthie hewe. Hereby I learned have not to despise Whatever thing seemes small in common eyes. An hideous Dragon, dreadfull to behold, Whose backe was arm'd against the dint of speare With shields of brasse that shone like burnisht golde, And forkhed sting that death in it did beare, Strove with a Spider, his unequall peare, And bad defiance to his enemie. The subtill vermin, creeping closely neare, Did in his drinke shed poyson privilie; Which, through his entrailes spredding diversly, Made him to swell, that nigh his bowells brust, And him enforst to yeeld the victorie, That did so much in his owne greatnesse trust. O, how great vainnesse is it then to scorne The weake, that hath the strong so oft forlorne! High on a hill a goodly Cedar grewe, Of wondrous length and straight proportion, That farre abroad her daintie odours threwe; Mongst all the daughters of proud Libanon, Her match in beautie was not anie one. Shortly within her inmost pith there bred A litle wicked worme, perceiv'd of none, That on her sap and vitall moysture fed: Thenceforth her garland so much honoured Began to die, O great ruth for the same! And her faire lockes fell from her loftie head, That shortly balde and bared she became. I, which this sight beheld, was much dismayed, To see so goodly thing so soone decayed. Soone after this I saw an Elephant, Adorn'd with bells and bosses gorgeouslie, That on his backe did beare, as batteilant , A gilden towre, which shone exceedinglie; That he himselfe through foolish vanitie, Both for his rich attire and goodly forme, Was puffed up with passing surquedrie , And shortly gan all other beasts to scorne, Till that a little Ant, a silly worme, Into his nosthrils creeping, so him pained, That, casting downe his towres, he did deforme Both borrowed pride, and native beautie stained. Let therefore nought that great is therein glorie, Sith so small thing his happines may varie. Looking far foorth into the ocean wide, A goodly Ship with banners bravely dight, And flag in her top-gallant, I espide Through the maine sea making her merry flight. Faire blewe the wind into her bosome right, And th'heavens looked lovely all the while, That she did seeme to daunce, as in delight, And at her owne felicitie did smile. All sodainely there clove unto her keele A little fish that men call Remora, Which stopt her course, and held her by the heele, That winde nor tide could move her thence away. Straunge thing me seemeth, that so small a thing Should able be so great an one to wring. A mighty Lyon, lord of all the wood, Having his hunger throughly satisfide With pray of beasts and spoyle of living blood, Safe in his dreadles den him thought to hide: His sternesse was his prayse, his strength his pride, And all his glory in his cruell clawes. I saw a Wasp, that fiercely him defide, And bad him battaile even to his iawes; Sore he him stong, that it the blood forth drawes, And his proude heart is fild with fretting ire: In vaine he threats his teeth, his tayle, his pawes, And from his bloodie eyes doth sparkle fire; That dead himselfe he wisheth for despight. So weakest may anoy the most of might! What time the Romaine Empire bore the raine Of all the world, and florisht most in might, The nations gan their soveraigntie disdaine, And cast to quitt them from their bondage quight. So, when all shrouded were in silent night, The Galles were, by corrupting of a mayde, Possest nigh of the Capitol through slight, Had not a Goose the treachery bewrayde. If then a goose great Rome from ruine stayde, And Iove himselfe, the patron of the place, Preservd from being to his foes betrayde, Why do vaine men mean things so much deface , And in their might repose their most assurance, Sith nought on earth can chalenge long endurance? When these sad sights were overpast and gone, My spright was greatly moved in her rest, With inward ruth and deare affection, To see so great things by so small distrest. Thenceforth I gan in my engrieved brest To scorne all difference of great and small, Sith that the greatest often are opprest, And unawares doe into daunger fall. And ye, that read these ruines tragicall, Learne, by their losse, to love the low degree; And if that Fortune chaunce you up to call To honours seat, forget not what you be: For he that of himselfe is most secure Shall finde his state most fickle and unsure. Worldlings , printed in ; and the six first of the Visions of It was the time when rest, soft sliding downe From heavens hight into mens heavy eyes, In the forgetfulnes of sleepe doth drowne The carefull thoughts of mortall miseries. Then did a ghost before mine eyes appeare, On that great rivers banck that runnes by Rome; Which, calling me by name, bad me to reare My lookes to heaven whence all good gifts do come, And crying lowd, Loe! now beholde, quoth hee, What under this great temple placed is: Lo, all is nought but flying vanitee! So I, that know this worlds inconstancies, Sith onely God surmounts all times decay, In God alone my confidence do stay. On high hills top I saw a stately frame, An hundred cubits high by iust assize , With hundreth pillours fronting faire the same, All wrought with diamond after Dorick wize. Nor brick nor marble was the wall in view, But shining christall, which from top to base Out of her womb a thousand rayons threw On hundred steps of Afrike golds enchase.@ Golde was the parget,$ and the seeling bright Did shine all scaly with great plates of golde; The floore of iasp and emeraude was dight.% O worlds vainesse! Whiles thus I did behold, An earthquake shooke the hill from lowest seat, And overthrew this frame with ruine great. Then did a sharped spyre of diamond bright, Ten feete each way in square, appeare to mee, Iustly proportion'd up unto his hight, So far as archer might his level see. The top thereof a pot did seeme to beare, Made of the mettall which we most do honour; And in this golden vessel couched weare The ashes of a mightie emperour: Upon foure corners of the base were pight , To beare the frame, foure great lyons of gold; A worthy tombe for such a worthy wight. Alas! this world doth nought but grievance hold: I saw a tempest from the heaven descend, Which this brave monument with flash did rend. I saw raysde up on yvorie pillowes tall, Whose bases were of richest mettalls warke, The chapters alablaster, the fryses christall, The double front of a triumphall arke. On each side purtraid was a Victorie, Clad like a nimph, that wings of silver weares, And in triumphant chayre was set on hie, The auncient glory of the Romaine peares. No worke it seem'd of earthly craftsmans wit, But rather wrought by his owne industry That thunder-dartes for Iove his syre doth fit. Let me no more see faire thing under sky, Sith that mine eyes have seene so faire a sight With sodain fall to dust consumed quight. Then was the faire Dodonian tree far seene Upon seaven hills to spread his gladsome gleame, And conquerours bedecked with his greene, Along the bancks of the Ausonian streame. There many an auncient trophee was addrest , And many a spoyle, and many a goodly show, Which that brave races greatnes did attest, That whilome from the Troyan blood did flow. Ravisht I was so rare a thing to vew; When lo! a barbarous troupe of clownish fone The honour of these noble boughs down threw: Under the wedge I heard the tronck to grone; And since, I saw the roote in great disdaine A twinne of forked trees send forth againe. I saw a wolfe under a rockie cave Noursing two whelpes; I saw her litle ones In wanton dalliance the teate to crave, While she her neck wreath'd from them for the nones . I saw her raunge abroad to seeke her food, And roming through the field with greedie rage T'embrew her teeth and clawes with lukewarm blood Of the small heards, her thirst for to asswage. I saw a thousand huntsmen, which descended Downe from the mountaines bordring Lombardie, That with an hundred speares her flank wide rened: I saw her on the plaine outstretched lie, Throwing out thousand throbs in her owne soyle : Soone on a tree uphang'd I saw her spoyle. I saw the bird that can the sun endure With feeble wings assay to mount on hight; By more and more she gan her wings t'assure, Following th'ensample of her mothers sight. I saw her rise, and with a larger flight To pierce the cloudes, and with wide pinneons To measure the most haughtie mountaines hight, Untill she raught the gods owne mansions. There was she lost; when suddaine I behelde, Where, tumbling through the ayre in firie fold, All flaming downe she on the plaine was felde, And soone her bodie turn'd to ashes colde. I saw the foule that doth the light dispise Out of her dust like to a worme arise. A falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd. C. I saw a river swift, whose fomy billowes Did wash the ground-work of an old great wall; I saw it cover'd all with griesly shadowes, That with black horror did the ayre appall: Thereout a strange beast with seven heads arose, That townes and castles under her brest did coure , And seem'd both milder beasts and fiercer foes Alike with equall ravine to devoure. Much was I mazde to see this monsters kinde In hundred formes to change his fearefull hew; When as at length I saw the wrathfull winde, Which blows cold storms, burst out of Scithian mew, That sperst these cloudes; and, in so short as thought, This dreadfull shape was vanished to nought. Then all astonied with this mighty ghoast, An hideous bodie, big and strong, I sawe, With side long beard, and locks down hanging loast , Sterne face, and front full of Satrnlike awe; Who, leaning on the belly of a pot, Pourd foorth a water, whose out gushing flood Ran bathing all the creakie@ shore aflot, Whereon the Troyan prince spilt Turnus blood; To two young babes: his left the palme tree stout, His right hand did the peacefull olive wield. And head with lawrell garnisht was about. Sudden both palme and olive fell away, And faire green lawrell branch did quite decay. Hard by a rivers side a virgin faire, Folding her armes to heaven with thousand throbs, And outraging her cheekes and golden haire, To falling rivers sound thus tun'd her sobs. Where is, quoth she, this whilom honoured face? Where the great glorie and the auncient praise, In which all worlds felicitie had place, When gods and men my honour up did raise? Suffisd' it not that civill warres me made The whole worlds spoile, but that this Hydra new, Of hundred Hercules to be assaide, With seven heads, budding monstrous crimes anew, So many Neroes and Caligulaes Out of these crooked shores must dayly rayse? Upon an hill a bright flame I did see, Waving aloft with triple point to skie, Which, like incense of precious cedar tree, With balmie odours fil'd th'ayre farre and nie. A bird all white, well feathered on each wing, Hereout up to the throne of gods did flie, And all the way most pleasant notes did sing, Whilst in the smoake she unto heaven did stie . Of this faire fire the scattered rayes forth threw On everie side a thousand shining beames: When sudden dropping of a silver dew O grievous chance! gan quench those precious flames; That it, which earst so pleasant sent did yeld, Of nothing now but noyous sulphure smeld. I saw a spring out of a rocke forth rayle , As cleare as christall gainst the sunnie beames; The bottome yeallow, like the golden grayle That bright Pactolus washeth with his streames. It seem'd that Art and Nature had assembled All pleasure there for which mans hart could long; And there a noyse alluring sleepe soft trembled, Of manie accords, more sweete than mermaids song, The seates and benches shone as yvorie, And hundred nymphes sate side by side about; When from nigh hills, with hideous outcrie, A troupe of satyres in the place did rout,@ Which with their villeine feete the streame did ray,$ Threw down the seats, and drove the nymphs away. Much richer then that vessell seem'd to bee Which did to that sad Florentine appeare, Casting mine eyes farre off, I chaunst to see Upon the Latine coast herselfe to reare. But suddenly arose a tempest great, Bearing close envie to these riches rare, Which gan assaile this ship with dreadfull threat, This ship, to which none other might compare: And finally the storme impetuous Sunke up these riches, second unto none, Within the gulfe of greedie Nereus. I saw both ship and mariners each one, And all that treasure, drowned in the maine: But I the ship saw after raisd' againe. Long having deeply gron'd these visions sad, I saw a citie like unto that same Which saw the messenger of tidings glad, But that on sand was built the goodly frame: It seem'd her top the firmament did rayse, And, no lesse rich than faire, right worthie sure If ought here worthie of immortall dayes, Or if ought under heaven might firme endure. Much wondred I to see so faire a wall: When from the Northerns coast a storme arose, Which, breathing furie from his inward gall On all which did against his course oppose, Into a clowde of dust sperst in the aire The weake foundations of this citie faire. At length, even at the time when Morpheus Most trulie doth unto our eyes appeare, Wearie to see the heavens still wavering thus, I saw Typhaeus sister comming neare; Whose head, full bravely with a morion hidd, Did seeme to match the gods in maiestie. She, by a rivers bancke that swift downe slidd, Over all the world did raise a trophee hie; An hundred vanquisht kings under her lay, With armes bound at their backs in shamefull wize. Whilst I thus mazed was with great affray, I saw the heavens in warre against her rize: Then downe she stricken fell with clap of thonder, That with great noyse I wakte in sudden wonder. Being one day at my window all alone, So manie strange things happened me to see, As much it grieveth me to thinke thereon. At my right hand a hynde appear'd to mee. So faire as mote the greatest god delite; Two eager dogs did her pursue in chace, Of which the one was blacke, the other white. With deadly force so in their cruell race They pincht the haunches of that gentle beast, That at the last, and in short time, I spide, Under a rocke, where she, alas! opprest, Fell to the ground, and there untimely dide. Cruell death vanquishing so noble beautie, Oft makes me wayle so hard a destenie. After, at sea a tall ship did appeare, Made all of heben and white yvorie; The sailes of golde, of silke the tackle were. Milde was the winde, calme seem'd the sea to bee, The skie eachwhere did show full bright and faire: With rich treasures this gay ship fraighted was: But sudden storme did so turmoyle the aire, And tumbled up the sea, that she, alas! Strake on a rock, that under water lay, And perished past all recoverie. O! how great ruth, and sorrow-full assay , Doth vex my spirite with perplexitie, Thus in a moment to see lost and drown'd So great riches as like cannot be found. The heavenly branches did I see arise Out of the fresh and lustie lawrell tree, Amidst the yong greene wood: of Paradise Some noble plant I thought my selfe to see. Such store of birds therein yshrowded were, Chaunting in shade their sundrie melodie, That with their sweetnes I was ravish't nere. While on this lawrell fixed was mine eie, The skie gan everie where to overcast, And darkned was the welkin all about, When sudden flash of heavens fire out brast , And rent this royall tree quite by the roote; Which makes me much and ever to complaine, For no such shadow shalbe had againe. Within this wood, out of a rocke did rise A spring of water, mildly rumbling downe, Whereto approched not in anie wise The homely shepheard, nor the ruder clowne; But manie Muses, and the Nymphes withall, That sweetly in accord did tune their voyce To the soft sounding of the waters fall; That my glad hart thereat did much reioyce. But, while herein I tooke my chiefe delight, I saw, alas! the gaping earth devoure The spring, the place, and all cleane out of sight; Which yet aggreeves my hart even to this houre, And wounds my soule with rufull memorie, To see such pleasures gon so suddenly. I saw a Phoenix in the wood alone, With purple wings and crest of golden hewe; Strange bird he was, whereby I thought anone That of some heavenly wight I had the vewe; Untill he came unto the broken tree, And to the spring that late devoured was. What say I more? Each thing at last we see Doth passe away: the Phoenix there, alas! Spying the tree destroid, the water dride, Himselfe smote with his beake, as in disdaine, And so foorthwith in great despight he dide; That yet my heart burnes in exceeding paine For ruth and pitie of so haples plight. O, let mine eyes no more see such a sight! At last, so faire a ladie did I spie, That thinking yet on her I burne and quake: On hearbs and flowres she walked pensively; Milde, but yet love she proudly did forsake: White seem'd her robes, yet woven so they were As snow and golde together had been wrought: Above the wast a darke clowde shrouded her. A stinging serpent by the heele her caught; Wherewith she languisht as the gathered floure, And, well assur'd, she mounted up to ioy. Alas! on earth so nothing doth endure, But bitter griefe and sorrowfull annoy: Which make this life wretched and miserable. Tossed with stormes of fortune variable. When I behold this tickle trustles state Of vaine worlds glorie, flitting too and fro, And mortall men tossed by troublous fate In restles seas of wretchednes and woe, I wish I might this wearie life forgoe, And shortly turne unto my happie rest, Where my free spirite might not anie moe Be vest with sights that doo her peace molest. And ye, faire Ladie, in whose bounteous brest All heavenly grace and vertue shrined is, When ye these rythmes doo read, and vew the rest, Loath this base world, and thinke of heavens blis: And though ye be the fairest of Gods creatures, Yet thinke that death shall spoyle your goodly features. Whatever man he be whose heavie mynd, With griefe of mournefull great mishap opprest, Fit matter for his cares increase would fynd, Let reade the rufull plaint herein exprest, Of one, I weene, the wofulst man alive, Even sad Alcyon , whose empierced brest Sharpe sorrowe did in thousand peeces rive. But whoso else in pleasure findeth sense, Or in this wretched life doeth take delight, Let him he banisht farre away from hence; Ne let the Sacred Sisters here be hight , Though they of sorrowe heavilie can sing, For even their heavie song would breede delight; But here no tunes save sobs and grones shall ring. In stead of them and their sweet harmonie, Let those three Fatall Sisters, whose sad hands Doe weave the direfull threeds of destinie, And in their wrath break off the vitall bands, Approach hereto; and let the dreadfull Queene Of Darknes deepe come from the Stygian strands, And grisly ghosts, to heare this dolefull teene , In gloomy evening, when the wearie sun After his dayes long labour drew to rest, And sweatie steedes, now having overrun The compast skie, gan water in the west, I walkt abroad to breath the freshing ayre In open fields, whose flowring pride, opprest With early frosts, had lost their beautie faire. There came unto my mind a troublous thought, Which dayly doth my weaker wit possesse, Ne lets it rest untill it forth have brought Her long borne infant, fruit of heavinesse, Which she conceived hath through meditation Of this worlds vainnesse and life's wretchednesse, That yet my soule it deepely doth empassion . So as I muzed on the miserie In which men live, and I of many most, Most miserable man, I did espie Where towards me a sory wight did cost , Clad all in black, that mourning did bewray, And Iacob staffe in hand devoutly crost, Like to some pilgrim come from farre away. His carelesse locks, uncombed and unshorne, Hong long adowne, and bearde all overgrowne, That well he seemd to be some wight forlorne: Downe to the earth his heavie eyes were throwne, As loathing light, and ever as he went He sighed soft, and inly deepe did grone, As if his heart in peeces would have rent. Approaching nigh his face I vewed nere, And by the semblant of his countenaunce Me seemd I had his person seene elsewhere, Most like Alcyon seeming at a glaunce; Alcyon he, the iollie shepheard swaine, That wont full merrilie to pipe and daunce, And fill with pleasance every wood and plaine. Yet halfe in doubt, because of his disguize, I softlie sayd, Alcyon! There-withall He lookt aside as in disdainefull wise, Yet stayed not, till I againe did call: Then, turning back, he saide, with hollow sound, Who is it that dooth name me, wofull thrall, The wretchedst man that treads this day on ground? One whom like wofulnesse, impressed deepe, Hath made fit mate thy wretched case to heare, And given like cause with thee to waile and wepe; Griefe finds some ease by him that like does beare. Then stay, Alcyon, gentle shepheard! stay, Quoth I, till thou have to my trustie eare Committed what thee dooth so ill apay . Cease, foolish man! saide he halfe wrothfully, To seeke to heare that which cannot be told; For the huge anguish, which doeth multiply My dying paines, no tongue can well unfold; Ne doo I care that any should bemone My hard mishap, or any weepe that would, But seeke alone to weepe, and dye alone. Then be it so, quoth I, that thou are bent To die alone, unpitied, unplained; Yet, ere thou die, it were convenient To tell the cause which thee thereto constrained, Least that the world thee dead accuse of guilt, And say, when thou of none shall be maintained, That thou for secret crime thy blood hast spilt. Who life does loath, and longs to be unbound From the strong shackles of fraile flesh, quoth he, Nought cares at all what they that live on ground Deem the occasion of his death to bee; Rather desires to be forgotten quight, Than question made of his calamitie; For harts deep sorrow hates both life and light. Yet since so much thou seemst to rue my griefe, And car'st for one that for himselfe cares nought, Sign of thy love, though nought for my reliefe, For my reliefe exceedeth living thought, I will to thee this heavie case relate: Then harken well till it to end be brought, For never didst thou heare more haplesse fate. Whilome I usde as thou right well doest know My little flocke on westerns downes to keep, Not far from whence Sabrinaes streame doth flow, And flowrie bancks with silver liquor steepe; Nought carde I then for worldly change or chaunce, For all my ioy was on my gentle sheepe, And to my pype to caroll and to daunce. It there befell, as I the fields did range Fearlesse and free, a faire young Lionesse, White as the native rose before the chaunge Which Venus blood did in her leaves impresse, I spied playing on the grassie plaine Her youthfull sports and kindlie wantonnesse, That did all other beasts in beawtie staine. Much was I moved at so goodly sight, Whose like before mine eye had seldome seene, And gan to cast how I her compasse might, And bring to hand that yet had never beene: So well I wrought with mildnes and with paine, That I her caught disporting on the greene, And brought away fast bound with silver chaine. And afterwardes I handled her so fayre, That though by kind shee stout and salvage were, For being borne an auncient lions hayre, And of the race that all wild beastes do feare, Yet I her fram'd, and wan so to my bent, That shee became so meeke and milde of cheare As the least lamb in all my flock that went. For shee in field, where-ever I did wend, Would wend with me, and waite by me all day; And all the night that I in watch did spend, If cause requir'd, or els in sleepe, if nay, Shee would all night by me or watch or sleepe; And evermore when I did sleepe or play, She of my flock would take full warie keepe . Safe then, and safest, were my sillie sheepe, Ne fear'd the wolfe, ne fear'd the wildest beast, All were I drown'd in carelesse quiet deepe: My lovely Lionesse without beheast So careful was for them and for my good, That when I waked, neither most nor least I found miscarried, or in plaine or wood. Oft did the shepheards which my hap did heare, And oft their lasses, which my luck envyde, Daylie resort to me from farre and neare, To see my Lyonesse, whose praises wyde Were spred abroad; and when her worthinesse Much greater than the rude report they tryde , They her did praise, and my good fortune blesse. Long thus I ioyed in my happinesse, And well did hope my ioy would have no end; But oh! fond man! that in worlds ficklenesse Reposedst hope, or weenedst Her thy frend That glories most in mortall miseries, And daylie doth her changefull counsels bend To make new matter fit for tragedies. For whilest I was thus without dread or dout, A cruel Satyre with his murdrous dart, Greedie of mischiefe, ranging all about, Gave her the fatall wound of deadly smart, And reft from me my sweete companion, And reft from me my love, my life, my hart: My Lyonesse, ah woe is me! is gon! Out of the world thus was she reft away, Out of the world, unworthy such a spoyle, And borne to heaven, for heaven a fitter pray; Much fitter then the lyon which with toyle Alcides slew, and fixt in firmament; Her now I seeke throughout this earthly soyle, And seeking misse, and missing doe lament. Therewith he gan afresh to waile and weepe, That I for pittie of his heavie plight Could not abstain mine eyes with teares to steepe; But when I saw the anguish of his spright Some deale alaid, I him bespake againe: Certes, Alcyon, painfull is thy plight, That it in me breeds almost equall paine, Yet doth not my dull wit well understand The riddle of thy loved Lionesse; For rare it seemes in reason to be skand, That man, who doth the whole worlds rule possesse, Should to a beast his noble hart embase, And be the vassall of his vassalesse; Therefore more plain areade this doubtfull case. Then sighing sore, Daphne thou knew'st, quoth he; She now is dead: no more endur'd to say, But fell to ground for great extremitie; That I, beholding it, with deepe dismay Was much apald, and, lightly him uprearing, Revoked life, that would have fled away, All were my selfe through grief in deadly drearing . Then gan I him to comfort all my best, And with milde counsaile strove to mitigate The stormie passion of his troubled brest; But he thereby was more empassionate, As stubborne steed that is with curb restrained Becomes more fierce and fervent in his gate, And, breaking foorth at last, thus dearnely plained: What man henceforth that breatheth vitall aire Will honour Heaven, or heavenly powers adore, Which so uniustly doth their iudgements share Mongst earthly wights, as to afflict so sore The innocent as those which do transgresse, And doe not spare the best or fairest more Than worst or foulest, but doe both oppresse? If this be right, why did they then create The world so faire, sith fairenesse is neglected? Or why be they themselves immaculate, If purest things be not by them respected? She faire, she pure, most faire, most pure she was, Yet was by them as thing impure reiected; Yet she in purenesse heaven it self did pas. In purenesse, and in all celestiall grace That men admire in goodly womankind, She did excell, and seem'd of angels race, Living on earth like angell new divinde , Adorn'd with wisedome and with chastitie, And all the dowries of a noble mind, Which did her beautie much more beautifie. No age hath bred since faire Astra left The sinfull world more vertue in a wight; And, when she parted hence, with her she reft Great hope, and robd her race of bounty quight. Well may the shepheard lasses now lament; For doubble losse by her hath on them light, To loose both her and bounties ornament. Ne let Elisa, royall shepheardesse, The praises of my parted love envy, For she hath praises in all plenteousnesse Powr'd upon her, like showers of Castaly, By her owne shepheard, Colin, her own shepheard, That her with heavenly hymnes doth deifie, Of rusticke Muse full hardly to be betterd. She is the rose, the glory of the day, And mine the primrose in the lowly shade: Mine? ah, not mine! amisse I mine did say: Not mine, but His which mine awhile her made; Mine to be-his, with him to live for ay. O that so faire a flowre so soon should fade, And through untimely tempest fall away! She fell away in her first ages spring, Whilst yet her leafe was greene, and fresh her rinde; And whilst her braunch faire blossomes foorth did bring, She fell away against all course of kinde . For age to dye is right, but youth is wrong; She fell away like fruit blowne down with winde. Weepe, Shepheard! weepe, to make my undersong . What hart so stonie hard but that would weepe. And poure forth fountaines of incessant teares? What Timon but would let compassion creepe Into his breast, and pierce his frosen eares? In stead of teares, whose brackish bitter well I wasted have, my heart bloud dropping weares, To think to ground how that faire blossome fell. Yet fell she not as one enforst to dye, Ne dyde with dread and grudging discontent, But as one toyld with travell downe doth lye, So lay she downe, as if to sleepe she went, And closde her eyes with carelesse quietriesse; The whiles soft death away her spirit hent , And soule assoyld from sinfull fleshlinesse. Yet ere that life her lodging did forsake, She, all resolv'd, and readie to remove, Calling to me ay me! this wise bespake; 'Alcyon! ah, my first and latest love! Ah! why does my Alcyon weepe and mourne, And grieve my ghost, that ill mote him behove, As if to me had chaunst some evill tourne! 'I, since the messenger is come for mee That summons soules unto the bridale feast Of his great Lord, must needs depart from thee, And straight obay his soveraine beheast; Why should Alcyon then so sore lament That I from miserie shall be releast, And freed from wretched long imprisonment! 'Our daies are full of dolour and disease. Our life afflicted with incessant paine, That nought on earth may lessen or appease; Why then should I desire here to remaine! Or why should he that loves me sorrie bee For my deliverance, or at all complaine My good to heare, and toward ioyes to see! 'I goe, and long desired have to goe; I goe with gladnesse to my wished rest, Whereas no worlds sad care nor wasting woe May come, their happie quiet to molest; But saints and angels in celestiall thrones Eternally Him praise that hath them blest; There shall I be amongst those blessed ones. 'Yet, ere I goe, a pledge I leave with thee Of the late love the which betwixt us past; My young Ambrosia; in lieu of mee, Love her; so shall our love for ever last. Thus, deare! adieu, whom I expect ere long.' So having said, away she softly past; Weepe, Shepheard! weepe, to make mine undersong. So oft as I record those piercing words, Which yet are deepe engraven in my brest, And those last deadly accents, which like swords Did wound my heart and rend my bleeding chest, With those sweet sugred speeches doe compare The which my soul first conquerd and possest, The first beginners of my endlesse care, And when those pallid cheekes and ashe hew, In which sad Death his pourtraiture had writ, And when those hollow eyes and deadly view, On which the cloud of ghastly night did sit, I match, with that sweete smile and chearful brow, Which all the world subdued unto it, How happie was I then, and wretched now! How happie was I when I saw her leade The shepheards daughters dauncing in a rownd! How trimly would she trace and softly tread The tender grasse, with rosye garland crownd! And when she list advaunce her heavenly voyce, Both Nymphes and Muses nigh she made astownd, And flocks and shepheards caused to reioyce. But now, ye shepheard lasses! who shall lead Your wandring troupes, or sing your virelayes ? Or who shall dight your bowres, sith she is dead That was the lady of your holy-dayes? Let now your blisse be turned into bale, And into plaints convert your ioyous playes, And with the same fill every hill and dale. Let bagpipe never more be heard to shrill, That may allure the senses to delight, Ne ever shepheard sound his oaten quill Unto the many , that provoke them might To idle pleasance; but let ghastlinesse And drearie horror dim the chearfull light, To make the image of true heavinesse. Let birds be silent on the naked spray, And shady woods resound with dreadfull yells; Let streaming floods their hastie courses stay, And parching drouth drie up the cristall wells; Let th'earth be barren, and bring foorth no flowres, And th'ayre be fild with noyse of dolefull knells, And wandring spirits walke untimely howres. And Nature, nurse of every living thing, Let rest her selfe from her long wearinesse, And cease henceforth things kindly forth to bring, But hideous monsters full of uglinesse; For she it is that hath me done this wrong; No nurse, but stepdame cruell, mercilesse. Weepe, Shepheard! weepe, to make my undersong. My little flock, whom earst I lov'd so well, And wont to feed with finest grasse that grew, Feede ye hencefoorth on bitter astrofell , And stinking smallage, and unsaverie rew; And when your mawes are with those weeds corrupted, Be ye the pray of wolves; ne will I rew That with your carkasses wild beasts be glutted. Ne worse to you, my sillie sheepe, I pray, Ne sorer vengeance wish on you to fall Than to my selfe, for whose confusde decay To carelesse heavens I doo daylie call; But heavens refuse to heare a wretches cry; And cruell Death doth scorn to come at call, Or graunt his boone that most desires to dye. The good and righteous he away doth take, To plague th'unrighteous which alive remaine; But the ungodly ones he doth forsake, By living long to multiplie their paine; Else surely death should be no punishment, As the Great Iudge at first did it ordaine, But rather riddance from long languishment. Therefore, my Daphne they have tane away; For worthie of a better place was she: But me unworthie willed here to stay, That with her lacke I might tormented be. Sith then they so have ordred, I will pay Penance to her, according their decree, And to her ghost doe service day by day. For I will walke this wandring pilgrimage, Throughout the world from one to other end, And in affliction waste my better age: My bread shall be the anguish of my mynd, My drink the teares which fro mine eyes do raine, My bed the ground that hardest I may fynd; So will I wilfully increase my paine. And she, my love that was, my saint that is, When she beholds from her celestiall throne In which shee ioyeth in eternall blis My bitter penance, will my case bemone, And pittie me that living thus doo die; For heavenly spirits have compassion On mortall men, and rue their miserie. So when I have with sorrow satisfyde Th'importune Fates which vengeance on me seeks, And th'heavens with long languor pacifyde, She, for pure pitie of my sufferance meeke, Will send for me; for which I daily long, And will till then my painfull penance eeke, Weepe, Shepheard! weepe, to make my undersong. Hencefoorth I hate whatever Nature made, And in her workmanship no pleasure finde, For they be all but vaine, and quickly fade So soone as on them blowes the northern winde; They tarrie not, but flit and fall away, Leaving behind them nought but griefe of minde, And mocking such as thinke they long will stay. I hate the heaven, because it doth withhould Me from my love, and eke my love from me; I hate the earth, because it is the mould Of fleshly slime and fraile mortalitie; I hate the fire, because to nought it flyes; I hate the ayre, because sighes of it be; I hate the sea, because it teares supplyes. I hate the day, because it lendeth light To see all things, and not my love to see; I hate the darknesse and the dreary night, Because they breed sad balefulnesse in mee; I hate all times, because all times doo fly So fast away, and may not stayed bee, But as a speedie post that passeth by. I hate to speake, my voyce is spent with crying; I hate to heare, lowd plaints have duld mine eares; I hate to tast, for food withholds my dying; I hate to see, mine eyes are dimd with teares; I hate to smell, no sweet on earth is left; I hate to feele, my flesh is numbd with feares: So all my senses from me are bereft. I hate all men, and shun all womankinde; The one, because as I they wretched are; The other, for because I doo not finde My love with them, that wont to be their starre. And life I hate, because it will not last; And death I hate, because it life doth marre; And all I hate that is to come or past. So all the world, and all in it I hate, Because it changeth ever to and fro, And never standeth in one certaine state, But, still unstedfast, round about doth goe Like a mill-wheele in midst of miserie, Driven with streames of wretchednesse and woe, That dying lives, and living still does dye. So doo I live, so doo I daylie die, And pine away in selfe-consuming paine! Sith she that did my vitall powres supplie, And feeble spirits in their force maintaine, Is fetcht fro me, why seeke I to prolong My wearie daies in dolour and disdalne! Weepe, Shepheard! weepe, to make my undersong. Why doo I longer live in lifes despight, And doo not dye then in despight of death! Why doo I longer see this loathsome light, And doo in darknesse not abridge my breath, Sith all my sorrow should have end thereby, And cares finde quiet! Is it so uneath To leave this life, or dolorous to dye? To live I finde it deadly dolorous, For life drawes care, and care continuall woe; Therefore to dye must needes be ioyeous, And wishfull thing this sad life to forgoe. But I must stay; I may it not amend; My Daphne hence departing bad me so; She bad me stay, till she for me did send. Yet, whilest I in this wretched vale doo stay, My wearie feete shall ever wandring be, That still I may be readie on my way When, as her messenger doth come for me; Ne will I rest my feete for feeblenesse, Ne will I rest my limmes for frailtie, Ne will I rest mine eyes for heavinesse. But, as the mother of the gods, that sought For faire Euridyce, her daughter dere, Throughout the world, with wofull heavie thought, So will I travell whilest I tarrie heere, Ne will I lodge, ne will I ever lin , Ne, when as drouping Titan draweth nere To loose his teeme, will I take up my inne . Ne sleepe, the harbenger of wearie wights, Shall ever lodge upon mine eye-lids more, Ne shall with rest refresh my fainting sprights, Nor failing force to former strength restore: But I will wake and sorrow all the night With Philumene , my fortune to deplore; With Philumene, the partner of my plight. And ever as I see the starre to fall, And under ground to goe to give them light Which dwell in darknesse, I to mind will call How my faire starre, that shind on me so bright, Fell sodainly and faded under ground; Since whose departure, day is turnd to night, And night without a Venus starre is found. But soon as day doth shew his deawie face, And cals foorth men unto their toylsome trade, I will withdraw me to some darkesome place, Or some dere cave, or solitarie shade; There will I sigh, and sorrow all day long, And the huge burden of my cares unlade. Weepe, Shepheard! weepe, to make my undersong. Henceforth mine eyes shall never more behold Faire thing on earth, ne feed on false delight Of ought that framed is of mortall mould, Sith that my fairest flower is faded quight; For all I see is vaine and transitorie, Ne will be held in any stedfast plight, But in a moment loose their grace and glorie. And ye, fond Men! on Fortunes wheele that ride, Or in ought under heaven repose assurance, Be it riches, beautie, or honours pride, Be sure that they shall have no long endurance, But ere ye be aware will flit away; For nought of them is yours, but th'only usance Of a small time, which none ascertains may. And ye, true Lovers! whom desastrous chaunce, Hath farre exiled from your ladies grace, To mourne in sorrow and sad sufferauncc, When ye doe heare me in that desert place Lamenting loud my Daphnes elegie, Helpe me to waile my miserable case, And when life parts vouchsafe to close mine eye. And ye, more happie Lovers! which enioy The presence of your dearest loves delight, When ye doe heare my sorrowfull annoy, Yet pittie me in your empassiond spright, And thinke that such mishap as chaunst to me May happen unto the most happiest wight; For all mens states alike unstedfast be. And ye, ray fellow Shepheards! which do feed Tour carelesse flocks on hils and open plaines, With better fortune than did me succeed, Remember yet my undeserved paines; And when ye heare that I am dead or slaine, Lament my lot, and tell your fellow-swaines That sad Aleyon dyde in lifes disdaine. And ye, faire Damsels! shepheards deare delights, That with your loves do their rude hearts possesse, When as my hearse shall happen to your sightes, Vouchsafe to deck the same with cyparesse; And ever sprinckle brackish teares among, In pitie of my undeserv'd distresse, The which, I, wretch, endured have thus long. And ye, poore Pilgrims! that with restlesse toyle Wearie your selves in wandring desart wayes, Till that you come where ye your vowes assoyle , When passing by ye reade these wofull layes On my grave written, rue my Daphnes wrong, And mourne for me that languish out my dayes. Cease, Shepheard! cease, and end thy undersong. Thus when he ended had his heavie plaint, The heaviest plaint that ever I heard sound, His cheekes wext pale, and sprights began to faint, As if againe he would have fallen to ground; Which when I saw, I, stepping to him light, Amooved him out of his stonie swound, And gan him to recomfort as I might. But he no waie recomforted would be, Nor suffer solace to approach him nie, But, casting up a sdeinfull eie at me, That in his traunce I would not let him lie, Did rend his haire, and beat his blubbred face, As one disposed wilfullie to die, That I sore griev'd to see his wretched case. Tho when the pang was somewhat overpast, And the outragious passion nigh appeased, I him desyrde, sith daie was overcast And darke night fast approched, to be pleased To turne aside unto my cabinet , And staie with me, till he were better eased Of that strong stownd which him so sore beset. But by no meanes I could him win thereto, Ne longer him intreate with me to staie, But without taking leave he foorth did goe With staggring pace and dismall looks dismay, As if that Death he in the face had seene, Or hellish hags had met upon the way: But what of him became I cannot weene. Darke is the day when Phoebus face is shrowded, And weaker sights may wander soone astray; But when they see his glorious raies unclowded, With steddy steps they keepe the perfect way: So, while this Muse in forraine land doth stay, Invention weepes, and pennes are cast aside; The time, like night, deprivd of chearfull day; And few doe write, but ah! too soone may slide. Then his thee home, that art our perfect guide, And with thy wit illustrate Englands fame, Daunting therby our neighbors ancient pride, That do for Poesie challenge chiefest name: So we that live, and ages that succeed, With great applause thy learned works shall reed. Ah! Colin, whether on the lowly plaine, Piping to shepheards thy sweet roundelayes, Or whether singing, in some loftie vaine, Heroicke deeds of past or present dayes, Or whether in thy lovely mistresse praise Thou list to exercise thy learned quill, Thy Muse hath got such grace and power to please, With rare invention, beautified by skill, As who therin can ever ioy their fill! O, therefore let that happy Muse proceed To clime the height of Vertues sacred hill, Where endlesse honour shal be made thy meed: Because no malice of succeeding dales Can rase those records of thy lasting praise. Happy, ye leaves! when as those lilly hands Which hold my life in their dead-doing might Shall handle you, and hold in loves soft bands, Lyke captives trembling at the victors sight. And happy lines! on which, with starry light. Those lamping eyes will deigne sometimes to look, And reade the sorrowes of my dying spright, And happy rymes! bath'd in the sacred brooke Of Helicon, whence she derived is. When ye behold that Angels blessed looke, My soules long-lacked food, my heavens blis, Leaves, lines, and rymes, seeke her to please alone, Whom if ye please, I care for other none! Unquiet thought! whom at the first I bred Of th'inward bale of my love-pined hart, And sithens have with sighes and sorrowes fed, Till greater then my wombe thou woxen art, Breake forth at length out of the inner part, In which thou lurkest lyke to vipers brood, And seeke some succour both to ease my smart, And also to sustayne thy selfe with food. But if in presence of that fayrest Proud Thou chance to come, fall lowly at her feet; And with meek humblesse and afflicted mood Pardon for thee, and grace for me, intreat: Which if she graunt, then live, and my love cherish: If not, die soone, and I with thee will perish. The soverayne beauty which I doo admyre, Witnesse the world how worthy to be prayzed! The light wherof hath kindled heavenly fyre In my fraile spirit, by her from basenesse raysed; That being now with her huge brightnesse dazed, Base thing I can no more endure to view: But, looking still on her, I stand amazed At wondrous sight of so celestiall hew. So when my toung would speak her praises dew, It stopped is with thoughts astonishment; And when my pen would write her titles true, It ravisht is with fancies wonderment: Yet in my hart I then both speak and write The wonder that my wit cannot endite. New yeare, forth looking out of Ianus gate, Doth seeme to promise hope of new delight, And, bidding th'old adieu, his passed date Bids all old thoughts to die in dumpish spright; And calling forth out of sad Winters night Fresh Love, that long hath slept in cheerlesse bower, Wils him awake, and soone about him dight His wanton wings and darts of deadly power. For lusty Spring now in his timely howre Is ready to come forth, him to receive; And warns the Earth with divers colord flowre To decke hir selfe, and her faire mantle weave. Then you, faire flowre! in whom fresh youth doth raine, Prepare your selfe new love to entertaine. Rudely thou wrongest my deare harts desire, In finding fault with her too portly pride: The thing which I doo most in her admire, Is of the world unworthy most envide. For in those lofty lookes is close implide Scorn of base things, and sdeigne of foul dishonor; Thretning rash eies which gaze on her so wide, That loosely they ne dare to looke upon her. Such pride is praise, such portlinesse is honor, That boldned innocence beares in hir eies, And her faire countenaunce, like a goodly banner, Spreds in defiaunce of all enemies. Was never in this world ought worthy tride , Without some spark of such self-pleasing pride. Be nought dismayd that her unmoved mind Doth still persist in her rebellious pride: Such love, not lyke to lusts of baser kynd, The harder wonne, the firmer will abide. The durefull oake whose sap is not yet dride Is long ere it conceive the kindling fyre; But when it once doth burne, it doth divide Great heat, and makes his flames to heaven aspire. So hard it is to kindle new desire In gentle brest, that shall endure for ever: Deepe is the wound that dints the parts entire With chaste affects, that naught but death can sever. Then thinke not long in taking litle paine To knit the knot that ever shall remaine. Fayre eyes! the myrrour of my mazed hart, What wondrous vertue is contayn'd in you, The which both lyfe and death forth from you dart Into the obiect of your mighty view? For when ye mildly looke with lovely hew, Then is my soule with life and love inspired: But when ye lowre, or looke on me askew, Then do I die, as one with lightning fyred. But since that lyfe is more then death desyred, Looke ever lovely, as becomes you best; That your bright beams, of my weak eies admyred, May kindle living fire within my brest. Such life should be the honor of your light, Such death the sad ensample of your might. More then most faire, full of the living fire Kindled above unto the Maker nere, No eies, but ioyes, in which al powers conspire, That to the world naught else be counted deare! Thrugh your bright beams doth not the blinded guest Shoot out his darts to base affections wound; But angels come, to lead fraile mindes to rest In chast desires, on heavenly beauty bound. You frame my thoughts, and fashion me within; You stop my toung, and teach my hart to speake; You calme the storme that passion did begin, Strong thrugh your cause, but by your vertue weak. Dark is the world where your light shined never; Well is he borne that may behold you ever. Long-while I sought to what I might compare Those powrefull eies which lighten my dark spright; Yet find I nought on earth, to which I dare Resemble th'ymage of their goodly light. Not to the sun, for they doo shine by night; Nor to the moone, for they are changed never; Nor to the starres, for they have purer sight; Nor to the fire, for they consume not ever; Nor to the lightning, for they still persever; Nor to the diamond, for they are more tender; Nor unto cristall, for nought may them sever; Nor unto glasse, such basenesse mought offend her. Then to the Maker selfe they likest be, Whose light doth lighten all that here we see. Unrighteous Lord of love, what law is this, That me thou makest thus tormented be, The whiles she lordeth in licentious blisse Of her freewill, scorning both thee and me? See! how the Tyrannesse doth ioy to see The hugh masscres which her eyes do make, And humbled harts brings captive unto thee, That thou of them mayst mightie vengeance take. But her proud hart doe thou a little shake, And that high look, with which she doth comptroll All this worlds pride, bow to a baser make , And al her faults in thy black booke enroll: That I may laugh at her in equall sort As she doth laugh at me, and makes my pain her sport. Dayly when I do seeke and sew for peace, And hostages doe offer for ray truth, She, cruell warriour, doth her selfe addresse To battell, and the weary war renew'th; Ne wilbe moov'd, with reason or with rewth , To graunt small respit to my restlesse toile; But greedily her fell intent poursewth, Of my poore life to make unpittied spoile. Yet my poore life, all sorrowes to assoyle, I would her yield, her wrath to pacify; But then she seeks, with torment and turmoyle, To force me live, and will not let me dy. All paine hath end, and every war hafh peace; But mine, no price nor prayer may surcease. One day I sought with her hart-thrilling eies To make a truce, and termes to entertaine; All fearlesse then of so false enimies, Which sought me to entrap in treasons traine. So, as I then disarmed did remaine, A wicked ambush, which lay hidden long In the close covert of her guilful eyen, Thence breaking forth, did thick about me throng. Too feeble I t'abide the brunt so strong, Was forst to yield my selfe into their hands; Who, me captiving streight with rigorous wrong, Have ever since kept me in cruell bands. So, Ladie, now to you I doo complaine Against your eies, that iustice I may gaine. In that proud port which her so goodly graceth, Whiles her faire face she reares up to the skie, And to the ground her eie-lids low embaseth, Most goodly temperature ye may descry; Myld humblesse mixt with awful! maiestie. For, looking on the earth whence she was borne, Her minde remembreth her mortalitie, Whatso is fayrest shall to earth returne. But that same lofty countenance seemes to scorne Base thing, and thinke how she to heaven may clime; Treading downe earth as lothsome and forlorne, That hinders heavenly thoughts with drossy slime. Yet lowly still vouchsafe to looke on me; Such lowlinesse shall make you lofty be. Retourne agayne, my forces late dismayd, Unto the siege by you abandon'd quite. Great shame it is to leave, like one afrayd, So fayre a peece for one repulse so light. 'Gaynst such strong castles needeth greater might Then those small forts which ye were wont belay : Such haughty mynds, enur'd to hardy fight, Disdayne to yield unto the first assay. Bring therefore all the forces that ye may, And lay incessant battery to her heart; Playnts, prayers, vowes, ruth, sorrow, and dismay; Those engins can the proudest love convert: And, if those fayle, fall down and dy before her; So dying live, and living do adore her. Ye tradefull Merchants, that, with weary toyle, Do seeke most pretious things to make your gain, And both the Indias of their treasure spoile, What needeth you to seeke so farre in vaine? For loe, my Love doth in her selfe containe All this worlds riches that may farre be found: If saphyres, loe, her eies be saphyres plaine; If rubies, loe, hir lips be rubies sound; If pearles, hir teeth be pearles, both pure and round; If yvorie, her forhead yvory weene; If gold, her locks are finest gold on ground; If silver, her faire hands are silver sheene: But that which fairest is but few behold: Her mind adornd with vertues manifold. One day as I unwarily did gaze On those fayre eyes, my loves immortall light, The whiles my stonisht hart stood in amaze, Through sweet illusion of her lookes delight, I mote perceive how, in her glauncing sight, Legions of Loves with little wings did fly, Darting their deadly arrows, fyry bright, At every rash beholder passing by. One of those archers closely I did spy, Ayming his arrow at my very hart: When suddenly, with twincle of her eye, The damzell broke his misintended dart. Had she not so doon, sure I had bene slayne; Yet as it was, I hardly scap't with paine. The glorious pourtraict of that angels face, Made to amaze weake mens confused skil, And this worlds worthlesse glory to embase, What pen, what pencil!, can expresse her fill? For though he colours could devize at will, And eke his learned hand at pleasure guide, Least, trembling, it his workmanship should spill , Yet many wondrous things there are beside: The sweet eye-glaunces, that like arrowes glide, The charming smiles, that rob sence from the hart, The lovely pleasance, and the lofty pride, Cannot expressed be by any art. A greater craftesmans hand thereto doth neede, That can expresse the life of things indeed. The rolling wheele that runneth often round, The hardest steele, in tract of time doth teare: And drizling drops, that often doe redound , The firmest flint doth in continuance weare: Yet cannot I, with many a drooping teare And long intreaty, soften her hard hart, That she will once vouchsafe my plaint to heare, Or looke with pitty on my payneful smart. But when I pleade, she bids me play my part; And when I weep, she sayes, teares are but water; And when I sigh, she sayes, I know the art; And when I waile, she turnes hir selfe to laughter. So do I weepe, and wayle, and pleade in vaine, Whiles she as steele and flint doth still remayne. The merry cuckow, messenger of Spring, His trompet shrill hath thrise already sounded. That warnes al lovers wayte upon their king, Who now is coming forth with girland crouned. With noyse whereof the quyre of byrds resounded Their anthemes sweet, devized of loves prayse, That all the woods theyr ecchoes back rebounded, As if they knew the meaning of their layes. But mongst them all which did Loves honor rayse, No word was heard of her that most it ought; But she his precept proudly disobayes, And doth his ydle message set at nought. Therefore, O Love, unlesse she turne to thee Ere cuckow end, let her a rebell be! In vaine I seeke and sew to her for grace, And doe myne humbled hart before her poure, The whiles her foot she in my necke doth place, And tread my life downe in the lowly floure . And yet the lyon, that is lord of power, And reigneth over every beast in field, In his most pride disdeigneth to devoure The silly lambe that to his might doth yield. But she, more cruell and more salvage wylde Than either lyon or the lyonesse, Shames not to be with guiltlesse bloud defylde, But taketh glory in her cruelnesse. Fayrer then fayrest! let none ever say That ye were blooded in a yeelded pray. Was it the worke of Nature or of Art, Which tempred so the feature of her face, That pride and meeknesse, mist by equall part, Doe both appeare t'adorne her beauties grace? For with mild pleasance, which doth pride displace, She to her love doth lookers eyes allure; And with stern countenance back again doth chace Their looser lookes that stir up lustes impure. With such strange termes her eyes she doth inure, That with one looke she doth my life dismay, And with another doth it streight recure: Her smile me drawes; her frowne me drives away. Thus doth she traine and teach me with her lookes; Such art of eyes I never read in bookes! This holy season , fit to fast and pray, Men to devotion ought to be inclynd: Therefore, I lykewise, on so holy day, For my sweet saynt some service fit will find. Her temple fayre is built within my mind, In which her glorious ymage placed is; On which my thoughts doo day and night attend, Lyke sacred priests that never thinke amisse. There I to her, as th'author of my blisse, Will builde an altar to appease her yre; And on the same my hart will sacrifise, Burning in flames of pure and chaste desyre: The which vouchsafe, O Goddesse, to accept, Amongst thy deerest relicks to be kept. Penelope, for her Ulisses sake, Deviz'd a web her wooers to deceave; In which the worke that she all day did make, The same at night she did againe unreave. Such subtile craft my damzell doth conceave, Th'importune suit of my desire to shonne: For all that I in many dayes do weave, In one short houre I find by her undonne. So when I thinke to end that I begonne, I must begin and never bring to end: For with one looke she spils that long I sponne, And with one word my whole years work doth rend. Such labour like the spyders web I fynd, Whose fruitlesse worke is broken with least wynd. When I behold that beauties wonderment, And rare perfection of each goodly part, Of Natures skill the onely complement, I honor and admire the Makers art. But when I feele the bitter balefull smart Which her fayre eyes unwares doe worke in mee, That death out of theyr shiny beames doe dart, I thinke that I a new Pandora see, Whom all the gods in councell did agree Into this sinfull world from heaven to send, That she to wicked men a scourge should bee, For all their faults with which they did offend. But since ye are my scourge, I will intreat That for my faults ye will me gently beat. How long shall this lyke-dying lyfe endure, And know no end of her owne mysery, But wast and weare away in termes unsure, 'Twixt feare and hope depending doubtfully! Yet better were attonce to let me die, And shew the last ensample of your pride, Then to torment me thus with cruelty, To prove your powre, which I too wel have tride. But yet if in your hardned brest ye bide A close intent at last to shew me grace, Then all the woes and wrecks which I abide, As meanes of blisse I gladly wil embrace; And wish that more and greater they might be, That greater meede at last may turne to mee. Sweet is the rose, but growes upon a brere; Sweet is the iunipeer; but sharpe his bough; Sweet is the eglantine, but pricketh nere; Sweet is the firbloome, but his braunches rough ; Sweet is the cypresse, but his rynd is rough; Sweet is the nut, but bitter is his pill ; Sweet is the broome-flowre, but yet sowre enough; And sweet is moly, but his root is ill. So every sweet with soure is tempred still, That maketh it be coveted the more: For easie things, that may be got at will, Most sorts of men doe set but little store. Why then should I accompt of little paine, That endlesse pleasure shall unto me gaine! Faire Proud! now tell me, why should faire be proud, Sith all worlds glorie is but drosse uncleane, And in the shade of death it selfe shall shroud, However now thereof ye little weene! That goodly idoll, now so gay beseene , Shall doffe her fleshes borrowd fayre attyre, And be forgot as it had never beene, That many now much worship and admire! Ne any then shall after it inquire, Ne any mention shall thereof remaine, But what this verse, that never shall expyre, Shall to you purchas with her thankles pain! Faire! be no lenger proud of that shall perish, But that which shall you make immortall cherish. The laurel-leafe which you this day doe weare Gives me great hope of your relenting mynd: For since it is the badge which I doe beare , Ye, bearing it, doe seeme to me inclind. The powre thereof, which ofte in me I find, Let it likewise your gentle brest inspire With sweet infusion, and put you in mind Of that proud mayd whom now those leaves attyre: Proud Daphne, scorning Phrebus lovely fyre, On the Thessalian shore from him did flie; For which the gods, in theyr revengefull yre, Did her transforme into a laurell-tree. Then fly no more, fayre Love, from Phebus chace, But in your brest his leafe and love embrace. See! how the stubborne damzell doth deprave My simple meaning with disdaynfull scorne, And by the bay which I unto her gave Accoumpts my self her captive quite forlorne. The bay, quoth she, is of the victours born, Yielded them by the vanquisht as theyr meeds, And they therewith doe poetes heads adorne, To sing the glory of their famous deeds. But sith she will the conquest challeng needs, Let her accept me as her faithfull thrall; That her great triumph, which my skill exceeds, I may in trump of fame blaze over all. Then would I decke her head with glorious bayes, And fill the world with her victorious prayse. My Love is lyke to yse, and I to fyre: How comes it then that this her cold so great Is not dissolv'd through my so hot desyre, But harder growes the more I her intreat? Or how comes it that my exceeding heat Is not delayd by her hart-frosen cold, But that I burne much more in boyling sweat, And feele my flames augmented manifold? What more miraculous thing may be told, That fire, which all things melts, should harden yse, And yse, which is congeald with sencelesse cold, Should kindle fyre by wonderful devyse? Such is the powre of love in gentle mind, That it can alter all the course of kynd. Ah! why hath Nature to so hard a hart Given so goodly giftes of beauties grace, Whose pryde depraves each other better part, And all those pretious ornaments deface? Sith to all other beastes of bloody race A dreadfull countenance she given hath, That with theyr terrour all the rest may chace, And warne to shun the daunger of theyr wrath. But my proud one doth worke the greater scath , Through sweet allurement of her lovely hew, That she the better may in bloody bath Of such poore thralls her cruell hands embrew. But did she know how ill these two accord, Such cruelty she would have soone abhord. The paynefull smith with force of fervent heat The hardest yron soone doth mollify, That with his heavy sledge he can it beat, And fashion to what he it list apply. Yet cannot all these flames in which I fry Her hart, more hard then yron, soft a whit, Ne all the playnts and prayrs with which I Doe beat on th'andvile of her stubberne wit: But still, the more she fervent sees my fit, The more she frieseth in her wilfull pryde, And harder growes, the harder she is smit With all the playnts which to her be applyde. What then remaines but I to ashes burne, And she to stones at length all frosen turne! Great wrong I doe, I can it not deny, To that most sacred empresse, my dear dred, Not finishing her Queene of Fary, That mote enlarge her living prayses, dead. But Lodwick , this of grace to me aread: Do ye not thinck th'accomplishment of it Sufficient worke for one mans simple head, All were it, as the rest, but rudely writ? How then should I, without another wit, Thinck ever to endure so tedious toyle, Sith that this one is tost with troublous fit Of a proud Love, that doth my spirite spoyle? Cease, then, till she vouchsafe to grawnt me rest, Or lend you me another living brest. Lyke as a ship, that through the ocean wyde By conduct of some star doth make her way, Whenas a storm hath dimd her trusty guyde, Out of her course doth wander far astray, So I, whose star, that wont with her bright ray Me to direct, with cloudes is over-cast, Doe wander now in darknesse and dismay, Through hidden perils round about me plast. Yet hope I well that, when this storme is past, My Helice , the lodestar of ray lyfe, Will shine again, and looke on me at last, With lovely light to cleare my cloudy grief. Till then I wander carefull, comfortlesse, In secret sorrow and sad pensivenesse. My hungry eyes, through greedy covetize Still to behold the obiect of their paine, With no contentment can themselves suffize; But having, pine, and having not, complaine. For lacking it, they cannot lyfe sustayne; And having it, they gaze on it the more, In their amazement lyke Narcissus vaine, Whose eyes him starv'd: so plenty makes me poore. Yet are mine eyes so filled with the store Of that faire sight, that nothing else they brooke, But lothe the things which they did like before, And can no more endure on them to looke. All this worlds glory seemeth vayne to me, And all their showes but shadowes, saving she. Tell me, when shall these wearie woes have end; Or shall their ruthlesse torment never cease, But al my days in pining languor spend, Without hope of asswagement or release? Is there no meanes for me to purchace peace, Or make agreement with her thrilling eyes; But that their cruelty doth still increace, And dayly more augment my miseryes? But when ye have shew'd all extremityes, Then think how little glory ye have gayned By slaying him, whose lyfe, though ye despyse, Mote have your life in honor long maintayned. But by his death, which some perhaps will mone, Ye shall condemned be of many a one. What guyle is this, that those her golden tresses She doth attyre under a net of gold, And with sly skill so cunningly them dresses, That which is gold or haire may scarse be told? Is it that mens frayle eyes, which gaze too bold, She may entangle in that golden snare; And, being caught, may craftily enfold Their weaker harts, which are not wel aware? Take heed therefore, myne eyes, how ye doe stare Henceforth too rashly on that guilefull net, In which if ever ye entrapped are, Out of her bands ye by no meanes shall get. Fondnesse it were for any, being free, To covet fetters, though they golden bee! Arion, when, through tempests cruel wracke, He forth was thrown into the greedy seas, Through the sweet musick which his harp did make Allur'd a dolphin him from death to ease. But my rude musick, which was wont to please Some dainty eares, cannot, with any skill, The dreadfull tempest of her wrath appease, Nor move the dolphin from her stubborn will. But in her pride she dooth persever still, All carelesse how my life for her decayes: Yet with one word she can it save or spill. To spill were pitty, but to save were prayse! Chuse rather to be praysd for doing good, Then to be blam'd for spilling guiltlesse blood. Sweet smile! the daughter of the Queene of Love, Expressing all thy mothers powrefull art, With which she wonts to temper angry Iove, When all the gods he threats with thundring dart, Sweet is thy vertue, as thy selfe sweet art. For when on me thou shinedst late in sadnesse, A melting pleasance ran through every part, And me revived with hart-robbing gladnesse; Whylest rapt with ioy resembling heavenly madness, My soule was ravisht quite as in a traunce, And, feeling thence no more her sorrowes sadnesse, Fed on the fulnesse of that chearfull glaunce. More sweet than nectar, or ambrosiall meat, Seem'd every bit which thenceforth I did eat. Mark when she smiles with amiable cheare, And tell me whereto can ye lyken it; When on each eyelid sweetly doe appeare An hundred Graces as in shade to sit. Lykest it seemeth, in my simple wit, Unto the fayre sunshine in somers day, That, when a dreadfull storme away is flit, Thrugh the broad world doth spred his goodly ray At sight whereof, each bird that sits on spray. And every beast that to his den was fled, Comes forth afresh out of their late dismay, And to the light lift up their drouping hed. So my storme-beaten hart likewise is cheared With that sunshine, when cloudy looks are cleared. Spenser's Pageants: An hundred Graces on her eyelids sat. Is it her nature, or is it her will, To be so cruell to an humbled foe? If nature, then she may it mend with skill; If will, then she at will may will forgoe. But if her nature and her will be so, That she will plague the man that loves her most, And take delight t'encrease a wretches woe, Then all her natures goodly guifts are lost; And that same glorious beauties ydle boast Is but a bayt such wretches to beguile, As, being long in her loves tempest tost, She meanes at last to make her pitious spoyle. O fayrest fayre! let never it be named, That so fayre beauty was so fowly shamed. The love which me so cruelly tormenteth So pleasing is in my extreamest paine, That, all the more my sorrow it augmenteth, The more I love and doe embrace my bane. Ne do I wish for wishing were but vaine To be acquit fro my continual smart, But ioy her thrall for ever to remayne, And yield for pledge my poor and captyved hart, The which, that it from her may never start, Let her, yf please her, bynd with adamant chayne, And from all wandring loves, which mote pervart His safe assurance, strongly it restrayne. Onely let her abstaine from cruelty, And doe me not before my time to dy. Shall I then silent be, or shall I speake? And if I speake, her wrath renew I shall; And if I silent be, my hart will breake, Or choked be with overflowing gall. What tyranny is this, both my hart to thrall, And eke my toung with proud restraint to tie, That neither I may speake nor thinke at all, But like a stupid stock in silence die! Yet I my hart with silence secretly Will teach to speak and my just cause to plead, And eke mine eies, with meek humility, Love-learned letters to her eyes to read; Which her deep wit, that true harts thought can spel, Wil soon conceive, and learne to construe well. When those renoumed noble peres of Greece Through stubborn pride among themselves did iar, Forgetfull of the famous golden fleece, Then Orpheus with his harp theyr strife did bar. But this continuall, cruell, civill warre The which my selfe against my selfe doe make, Whilest my weak powres of passions warreid arre, No skill can stint, nor reason can aslake. But when in hand my tunelesse harp I take, Then doe I more augment my foes despight, And griefe renew, and passions doe awake To battaile, fresh against my selfe to fight. Mongst whome the more I seeke to settle peace, The more I fynd their malice to increace. Leave, Lady! in your glasse of cristall clene Your goodly selfe for evermore to vew, And in my selfe, my inward selfe I meane, Most lively lyke behold your semblant trew. Within my hart, though hardly it can shew Thing so divine to vew of earthly eye, The fayre idea of your celestiall hew And every part remaines immortally: And were it not that through your cruelty With sorrow dimmed and deform'd it were, The goodly ymage of your visnomy , Clearer than cristall, would therein appere. But if your selfe in me ye playne will see, Remove the cause by which your fayre beames darkned be. When my abodes prefixed time is spent, My cruell fayre streight bids me wend my way: But then from heaven most hideous stormes are sent, As willing me against her will to stay. Whom then shall I or heaven, or her obay? The heavens know best what is the best for me: But as she will, whose will my life doth sway, My lower heaven, so it perforce must be. But ye high hevens, that all this sorowe see, Sith all your tempests cannot hold me backe, Aswage your storms, or else both you and she Will both together me too sorely wrack. Enough it is for one man to sustaine The stormes which she alone on me doth raine. Trust not the treason of those smyling lookes, Untill ye have their guylefull traynes well tryde; For they are lyke but unto golden hookes, That from the foolish fish theyr bayts do hyde: So she with flattring smyles weake harts doth guyde Unto her love, and tempte to theyr decay; Whome, being caught, she kills with cruell pryde, And feeds at pleasure on the wretched pray. Yet even whylst her bloody hands them slay, Her eyes looke lovely, and upon them smyle, That they take pleasure in their cruell play, And, dying, doe themselves of payne beguyle. O mighty charm! which makes men love theyr bane, And thinck they dy with pleasure, live with payne. Innocent paper! whom too cruell hand Did make the matter to avenge her yre, And ere she could thy cause well understand, Did sacrifize unto the greedy fyre, Well worthy thou to have found better hyre Then so bad end, for hereticks ordayned; Yet heresy nor treason didst conspire, But plead thy maisters cause, unjustly payned: Whom she, all carelesse of his grief, constrayned To utter forth the anguish of his hart, And would not heare, when he to her complayned The piteous passion of his dying smart. Yet live for ever, though against her will, And speake her good, though she requite it ill. Fayre Cruell! why are ye so fierce and cruell? Is it because your eyes have powre to kill? Then know that mercy is the Mighties iewell, And greater glory think to save then spill. But if it be your pleasure and proud will To shew the powre of your imperious eyes, Then not on him that never thought you ill, But bend your force against your enemyes. Let them feel the utmost of your crueltyes, And kill with looks, as cockatrices do: But him that at your footstoole humbled lies, With mercifull regard give mercy to. Such mercy shall you make admyr'd to be; So shall you live, by giving life to me. Long languishing in double malady Of my harts wound and of my bodies griefe, There came to me a leach, that would apply Fit medcines for my bodies best reliefe. Vayne man, quoth I, that hast but little priefe In deep discovery of the mynds disease; Is not the hart of all the body chiefe, And rules the members as it selfe doth please? Then with some cordialls seeke for to appease The inward languor of my wounded hart, And then my body shall have shortly ease. But such sweet cordialls passe physicians art: Then, my lyfes leach! doe you your skill reveale, And with one salve both hart and body heale. Doe I not see that fayrest ymges Of hardest marble are of purpose made, For that they should endure through many ages, Ne let theyr famous moniments to fade? Why then doe I, untrainde in lovers trade, Her hardnes blame, which I should more commend? Sith never ought was excellent assayde Which was not hard t'atchive and bring to end; Ne ought so hard, but he that would attend Mote soften it and to his will allure. So do I hope her stubborne hart to bend, And that it then more stedfast will endure: Only my paines wil be the more to get her; But, having her, my ioy wil be the greater. So oft as homeward I from her depart, I go lyke one that, having lost the field, Is prisoner led away with heavy hart, Despoyld of warlike armes and knowen shield. So doe I now my self a prisoner yield To sorrow and to solitary paine, From presence of my dearest deare exylde, Long-while alone in languor to remaine. There let no thought of ioy, or pleasure vaine, Dare to approch, that may my solace breed; Bet sudden dumps , and drery sad disdayne Of all worlds gladnesse, more my torment feed. So I her absens will my penaunce make, That of her presens I my meed may take. The panther, knowing that his spotted hyde Doth please all beasts, but that his looks them fray , Within a bush his dreadful head doth hide, To let them gaze, whylst he on them may pray. Right so my cruell fayre with me doth play; For with the goodly semblance of her hew She doth allure me to mine owne decay, And then no mercy will unto me shew. Great shame it is, thing so divine in view, Made for to be the worlds most ornament, To make the bayte her gazers to embrew: Good shames to be to ill an instrument! But mercy doth with beautie best agree, As in theyr Maker ye them best may see. Of this worlds theatre in which we stay, My Love, like the spectator, ydly sits, Beholding me, that all the pageants play, Disguysing diversly my troubled wits. Sometimes I ioy when glad occasion fits, And mask in myrth lyke to a comedy: Soone after, when my ioy to sorrow flits, I waile, and make my woes a tragedy. Yet she, beholding me with constant eye, Delights not in my merth, nor rues my smart: But when I laugh, she mocks; and when I cry, She laughs, and hardens evermore her hart. What then can move her? If nor merth, nor mone, She is no woman, but a sencelesse stone. So oft as I her beauty doe behold, And therewith doe her cruelty compare, I marvaile of what substance was the mould The which her made attonce so cruell faire. Not earth; for her high thoughts more heavenly are: Not water; for her love doth burne like fyre: Not ayre; for she is not so light or rare; Not fyre; for she doth friese with faint desire. Then needs another element inquire, Whereof she mote be made; that is, the skye. For to the heaven her haughty looks aspire, And eke her love is pure immortall hye. Then sith to heaven ye lykened are the best, Be lyke in mercy as in all the rest. Fayre ye be sure, but cruell and unkind, As is a tygre, that with greedinesse Hunts after bloud; when he by chance doth find A feeble beast, doth felly him oppresse. Fayre be ye sure, but proud and pitilesse, As is a storme, that all things doth prostrate; Finding a tree alone all comfortlesse, Beats on it strongly, it to ruinate. Fayre be ye sure, but hard and obstinate, As is a rocke amidst the raging floods; Gaynst which a ship, of succour desolate, Doth suffer wreck both of her selfe and goods. That ship, that tree, and that same beast, am I, Whom ye doe wreck, doe ruine, and destroy. Sweet warriour! when shall I have peace with you? High time it is this warre now ended were, Which I no lenger can endure to sue, Ne your incessant battry more to beare. So weake my powres, so sore my wounds, appear, That wonder is how I should live a iot, Seeing my hart through-launced every where With thousand arrowes which your eies have shot. Yet shoot ye sharpely still, and spare me not, But glory thinke to make these cruel stoures . Ye cruell one! what glory can be got, In slaying him that would live gladly yours? Make peace therefore, and graunt me timely grace, That al my wounds will heale in little space. By her that is most assured to her selfe. Weake is th'assurance that weake flesh reposeth In her own powre, and scorneth others ayde; That soonest fals, when as she most supposeth Her selfe assur'd, and is of nought affrayd, All flesh is frayle, and all her strength unstayd, Like a vaine bubble blowen up with ayre: Devouring tyme and changeful chance have prayd Her glorious pride, that none may it repayre. Ne none so rich or wise, so strong or fayre, But fayletb, trusting on his owne assurance: And he that standeth on the hyghest stayre Fals lowest; for on earth nought hath endurance. Why then doe ye, proud fayre, misdeeme so farre, That to your selfe ye most assured arre! Thrise happie she that is so well assured Unto her selfe, and setled so in hart, That neither will for better be allured, Ne feard with worse to any chaunce to start: But, like a steddy ship, doth strongly part The raging waves, and kcepes her course aright, Ne ought for tempest doth from it depart, Ne ought for fayrer weathers false delight. Such selfe-assurance need not feare the spight Of grudging foes, ne favour seek of friends: But in the stay of her owne stedfast might, Neither to one her selfe nor other bends. Most happy she that most assur'd doth rest; But he most happy who such one loves best. They that in course of heavenly spheares are skild To every planet point his sundry yeare, In which her circles voyage is fulfild: As Mars in threescore yeares doth run his spheare. So, since the winged god his planet cleare Began in me to move, one yeare is spent; The which doth longer unto me appeare, Then al those fourty which my life out-went. Then, by that count which lovers books invent, The spheare of Cupid fourty yeares containes, Which I have wasted in long languishment, That seem'd the longer for my greater paines. But let my Loves fayre planet short her wayes This yeare ensuing, or else short my dayes. The glorious image of the Makers beautie, My soverayne saynt, the idoll of my thought, Dare not henceforth, above the bounds of dewtie, T'accuse of pride, or rashly blame for ought. For being, as she is, divinely wrought, And of the brood of angels heavenly born, And with the crew of blessed saynts upbrought, Each of which did her with theyr guifts adorne, The bud of ioy, the blossome of the morne, The beame of light, whom mortal eyes admyre, What reason is it then but she should scorne Base things, that to her love too bold aspire! Such heavenly formes ought rather worshipt be, Then dare be lov'd by men of meane degree. The weary yeare his race now having run, The new begins his compast course anew: With shew of morning mylde he bath begun, Betokening peace and plenty to ensew. So let us, which this chaunge of weather vew, Chaunge eke our mynds, and former lives amend; The old yeares sinnes forepast let us eschew, And fly the faults with which we did offend. Then shall the new yeares ioy forth freshly send Into the glooming world his gladsome ray, And all these stormes, which now his beauty blend , Shall turne to calmes, and tymely cleare away. So, likewise, Love! cheare you your heavy spright, And chaunge old yeares annoy to new delight. After long stormes and tempests sad assay, Which hardly I endured heretofore, In dread of death, and daungerous dismay, With which my silly bark was tossed sore, I doe at length descry the happy shore, In which I hope ere long for to arryve: Fayre soyle it seemes from far, and fraught with store Of all that deare and daynty is alyve. Most happy he that can at last atchyve The ioyous safety of so sweet a rest; Whose least delight sufficeth to deprive Remembrance of all paines which him opprest. All paines are nothing in respect of this; All sorrowes short that gaine eternall blisse. Comming to kisse her lyps, such grace I found, Me seemd I smelt a gardin of sweet flowres, That dainty odours from them threw around, For damzels fit to decke their lovers bowres. Her lips did smell lyke unto gillyflowers; Her ruddy cheekes lyke unto roses red; Her snowy browes lyke budded bellamoures; Her lovely eyes lyke pincks but newly spred; Her goodly bosome lyke a strawberry bed; Her neck lyke to a bounch of cullambynes; Her brest lyke lillyes, ere their leaves be shed; Her nipples lyke young blossomd jessemynes. Such fragrant flowres doe give most odorous smell; But her sweet odour did them all excell. The doubt which ye misdeeme, fayre Love, is vaine, That fondly feare to lose your liberty, When, losing one, two liberties ye gayne, And make him bond that bondage earst did fly. Sweet be the bands the which true love doth tye, Without constraynt or dread of any ill: The gentle birde feeles no captivity Within her cage, but sings, and feeds her fill. There pride dare not approch, nor discord spill The league twixt them that loyal love hath bound, But simple Truth and mutual Good-will Seeks with sweet peace to salve each others wound: There Fayth doth fearless dwell in brasen towre, And spotlesse Pleasure builds her sacred bowre. To all those happy blessings which ye have With plenteous hand by heaven upon you thrown, This one disparagement they to you gave, That ye your love lent to so meane a one. Ye, whose high worths surpassing paragon Could not on earth have found one fit for mate, Ne but in heaven matchable to none, Why did ye stoup unto so lowly state? But ye thereby much greater glory gate, Then had ye sorted with a princes pere: For now your light doth more it selfe dilate, And, in my darknesse, greater doth appeare. Yet, since your light hath once enlumind me, With my reflex yours shall encreased be. Lyke as a huntsman, after weary chace, Seeing the game from him escapt away, Sits downe to rest him in some shady place, With panting hounds, beguiled of their pray, So, after long pursuit and vaine assay, When I all weary had the chace forsooke, The gentle deer returnd the selfe-same way, Thinking to quench her thirst at the next brooke. There she, beholding me with mylder looke, Sought not to fly, but fearlesse still did bide, Till I in hand her yet halfe trembling tooke, And with her own goodwill her fyrmely tyde. Strange thing, me seemd, to see a beast so wyld So goodly wonne, with her owne will beguyld. Most glorious Lord of lyfe! that on this day Didst make thy triumph over death and sin, And, having harrowd hell, didst bring away Captivity thence captive, us to win, This ioyous day, dear Lord, with ioy begin; And grant that we, for whom thou diddest dy, Being with thy deare blood clene washt from sin, May live for ever in felicity; And that thy love we weighing worthily, May likewise love thee for the same againe, And for thy sake, that all lyke deare didst buy. With love may one another entertayne! So let us love, deare Love, lyke as we ought: Love is the lesson which the Lord us taught. The famous warriors of the anticke world Us'd trophees to erect in stately wize, In which they would the records have enrold Of theyr great deeds and valorous emprize. What trophee then shall I most fit devize, In which I may record the memory Of my loves conquest, peerlesse beauties prise, Adorn'd with honour, love, and chastity! Even this verse, vowd to eternity, Shall be thereof immortall moniment, And tell her praise to all posterity, That may admire such worlds rare wonderment; The happy purchase of my glorious spoile, Gotten at last with labour and long toyle. Fresh Spring, the herald of loves mighty king, In whose cote-armour richly are displayd All sorts of flowres the which on earth do spring, In goodly colours gloriously arrayd, Goe to my Love, where she is carelesse layd, Yet in her winters bowre not well awake: Tell her the ioyous time wil not be staid, Unlesse she doe him by the forelock take; Bid her therefore her selfe soone ready make, To wayt on Love amongst his lovely crew, Where every one that misseth then her make Shall be by him amearst with penance dew. Make haste therefore, sweet Love, while it is prime ; For none can call againe the passed time. I ioy to see how, in your drawen work, Your selfe unto the Bee ye doe compare, And me unto the Spyder, that doth lurke In close awayt, to catch her unaware. Right so your selfe were caught in cunning snare Of a deare foe, and thralled to his love; In whose streight bands ye now captived are So firmely, that ye never may remove. But as your worke is woven all about With woodbynd flowers and fragrant eglantine, So sweet your prison you in time shall prove, With many deare delights bedecked fyne: And all thensforth eternall peace shall see Betweene the Spyder and the gentle Bee. Oft when my spirit doth spred her bolder winges, In mind to mount up to the purest sky, It down is weighd with thought of earthly things, And clogd with burden of mortality: Where, when that soverayne beauty it doth spy, Resembling heavens glory in her light, Drawn with sweet pleasures bayt it back doth fly, And unto heaven forgets her former flight. There my fraile fancy, fed with full delight, Doth bathe in blisse, and mantlcth most at ease; Ne thinks of other heaven, but how it might Her harts desire with most contentment please. Hart need not wish none other happinesse, But here on earth to have such hevens blisse. Being my self captyved here in care, My hart, whom none with servile bands can tye, But the fayre tresses of your golden hayre, Breaking his prison, forth to you doth fly. Like as a byrd, that in ones hand doth spy Desired food, to it doth make his flight, Even so my hart, that wont on your fayre eye To feed his fill, flyes backe unto your sight. Doe you him take, and in your bosome bright Gently encage, that he may be your thrall: Perhaps he there may learne, with rare delight, To sing your name and prayses over all: That it hereafter may you not repent, Him lodging in your bosome to have lent. Most happy letters! fram'd by skilfull trade, With which that happy name was first desynd The which three times thrise happy hath me made, With guifts of body, fortune, and of mind. The first ray being to me gave by kind, From mothers womb deriv'd by dew descent: The second is my sovereigne Queene most kind, That honour and large richesse to me lent: The third my Love, my lives last ornament, By whom my spirit out of dust was raysed, To speake her prayse and glory excellent, Of all alive most worthy to be praysed. Ye three Elizabeths! for ever live, That three such graces did unto me give. One day I wrote her name upon the strand, But came the waves and washed it away: Agayne I wrote it with a second hand; But came the tyde, and made my paynes his pray. Vayne man, sayd she, that doest in vaine assay A mortall thing so to immortalize; For I my selve shall lyke to this decay, And eke my name bee wyped out lykewize. Not so, quod I; let baser things devize To dy in dust, but you shall live by fame: My verse your vertues rare shall eternize, And in the hevens wryte your glorious name. Where, when as death shall all the world subdew, Our love shall live, and later life renew. Fayre bosome! fraught with vertues richest tresure, The neast of love, the lodging of delight, The bowre of blisse, the paradice of pleasure, The sacred harbour of that hevenly spright, How was I ravisht with your lovely sight, And my frayle thoughts too rashly led astray, Whiles diving deepe through amorous insight, On the sweet spoyle of beautie they did pray, And twixt her paps, like early fruit in May, Whose harvest seemd to hasten now apace, They loosely did theyr wanton winges display, And there to rest themselves did boldly place. Sweet thoughts! I envy your so happy rest, Which oft I wisht, yet never was so blest. Was it a dreame, or did I see it playne? A goodly table of pure yvory, All spred with juncats fit to entertayne The greatest prince with pompous roialty: Mongst which, there in a silver dish did ly Two golden apples of unvalewd price, Far passing those which Hercules came by, Or those which Atalanta did entice; Exceeding sweet, yet voyd of sinfull vice; That many sought, yet none could ever taste; Sweet fruit of pleasure, brought from Paradice By Love himselfe, and in his garden plaste. Her brest that table was, so richly spredd; My thoughts the guests, which would thereon have fedd. Lackyng my Love, I go from place to place, Lyke a young fawne that late hath lost the hynd, And seeke each where where last I sawe her face, Whose ymage yet I carry fresh in mynd. I seeke the fields with her late footing synd; I seeke her bowre with her late presence deckt; Yet nor in field nor bowre I can her fynd, Yet field and bowre are full of her aspect. But when myne eyes I therunto direct, They ydly back return to me agayne; And when I hope to see theyr trew obiect, I fynd my self but fed with fancies vayne. Cease then, myne eyes, to seeke her selfe to see, And let my thoughts behold her selfe in mee. Men call you fayre, and you doe credit it, For that your selfe ye daily such doe see: But the trew fayre, that is the gentle wit And vertuous mind, is much more praysd of me. For all the rest, how ever fayre it be, Shall turne to nought and lose that glorious hew; But onely that is permanent, and free From frayle corruption that doth flesh ensew. That is true beautie: that doth argue you To be divine, and born of heavenly seed, Deriv'd from that fayre Spirit from whom all true And perfect beauty did at first proceed. He only fayre, and what he fayre hath made; All other fayre, lyke flowres, untymely fade. After so long a race as I have run Through Faery land, which those six books compile, Give leave to rest me being half foredonne, And gather to my selfe new breath awhile. Then, as a steed refreshed after toyle, Out of my prison I will break anew, And stoutly will that second work assoyle , With strong endevour and attention dew. Till then give leave to me in pleasant mew To sport my Muse, and sing my Loves sweet praise, The contemplation of whose heavenly hew My spirit to an higher pitch will rayse. But let her prayses yet be low and meane, Fit for the handmayd of the Faery Queene. Fayre is my Love, when her fayre golden haires With the loose wynd ye waving chance to marke; Fayre, when the rose in her red cheekes appeares, Or in her eyes the fyre of love does sparke; Fayre, when her brest, lyke a rich laden barke, With pretious merchandize she forth doth lay; Fayre, when that cloud of pryde, which oft doth dark Her goodly light, with smiles she drives away. But fayrest she, when so she doth display The gate with pearles and rubyes richly dight, Throgh which her words so wise do make their way, To beare the message of her gentle spright. The rest be works of Natures wonderment; But this the worke of harts astonishment. Ioy of my life! full oft for loving you I blesse my lot, that was so lucky placed: But then the more your owne mishap I rew, That are so much by so meane love embased. For had the equall hevens so much you graced In this as in the rest, ye mote invent Some hevenly wit, whose verse could have enchased Your glorious name in golden moniment. But since ye deignd so goodly to relent To me your thrall, in whom is little worth, That little that I am shall all be spent In setting your immortal prayses forth: Whose lofty argument, uplifting me, Shall lift you up unto an high degree. Let not one sparke of filthy lustfull fyre Breake out, that may her sacred peace molest; Ne one light glance of sensuall desyre Attempt to work her gentle mindes unrest: But pure affections bred in spotlesse brest, And modest thoughts breathd from well-tempred spirits, Goe visit her in her chaste bowre of rest, Accompanyde with ngelick delightes. There fill your selfe with those most ioyous sights, The which my selfe could never yet attayne: But speake no word to her of these sad plights, Which her too constant stiffnesse doth constrayn. Onely behold her rare perfection, And blesse your fortunes fayre election. The world, that cannot deeme of worthy things, When I doe praise her, say I doe but flatter: So does the cuckow, when the mavis sings, Begin his witlesse note apace to clatter. But they, that skill not of so heavenly matter, All that they know not, envy or admyre; Rather then envy, let them wonder at her, But not to deeme of her desert aspyre. Deepe in the closet of my parts entyre , Her worth is written with a golden quill, That me with heavenly fury doth inspire, And my glad mouth with her sweet prayses fill: Which when as Fame in her shril trump shall thunder, Let the world chuse to envy or to wonder. Venemous tongue, tipt with vile adders sting, Of that self kynd with which the Furies fell, Their snaky heads doe combe, from which a spring Of poysoned words and spightfull speeches well, Let all the plagues and horrid paines of hell Upon thee fall for thine accursed hyre, That with false forged lyes, which thou didst tell. In my true Love did stirre up coles of yre: The sparkes whereof let kindle thine own fyre, And, catching hold on thine own wicked bed, Consume thee quite, that didst with guile conspire In my sweet peace such breaches to have bred! Shame be thy meed, and mischiefe thy reward, Due to thy selfe, that it for me prepard! Since I did leave the presence of my Love, Many long weary dayes I have outworne, And many nights, that slowly seemd to move Theyr sad protract from evening untill morn. For, when as day the heaven doth adorne, I wish that night the noyous day would end: And when as night hath us of light forlorne, I wish that day would shortly reascend. Thus I the time with expectation spend, And faine my griefe with chaunges to beguile, That further seemes his terme still to extend, And maketh every minute seem a myle. So sorrowe still doth seem too long to last; But ioyous houres do fly away too fast. Since I have lackt the comfort of that light The which was wont to lead my thoughts astray, I wander as in darknesse of the night, Affrayd of every dangers least dismay. Ne ought I see, though in the clearest day, When others gaze upon theyr shadowes vayne, But th'only image of that heavenly ray Whereof some glance doth in mine eie remayne. Of which beholding the idaea playne, Through contemplation of my purest part, With light thereof I doe my self sustayne, And thereon feed my love-affamisht hart. But with such brightnesse whylest I fill my mind, I starve my body, and mine eyes doe blynd. Lyke as the culver on the bared bough Sits mourning for the absence of her mate, And in her songs sends many a wishful vow For his returns, that seemes to linger late, So I alone, how left disconsolate, Mourne to my selfe the absence of my Love; And wandring here and there all desolate, Seek with my playnts to match that mournful dove Ne ioy of ought that under heaven doth hove , Can comfort me, but her owne ioyous sight, Whose sweet aspect both God and man can move, In her unspotted pleasauns to delight. Dark is my day, whyles her fayre light I mis, And dead my life that wants such lively blis. Ye learned Sisters, which have oftentimes Beene to me ayding, others to adorne Whom ye thought worthy of your gracefull rymes, That even the greatest did not greatly scorne To heare theyr names sung in your simple layes, But ioyed in theyr praise, And when ye list your own mishaps to mourne, Which death, or love, or fortunes wreck did rayse, Your string could soone to sadder tenor turne, And teach the woods and waters to lament Your dolefull dreriment, Now lay those sorrowfull complaints aside, And having all your heads with girlands crownd, Helpe me mine owne Loves prayses to resound: Ne let the same of any be envide: So Orpheus did for his owne bride; So I unto my selfe alone will sing; The woods shall to me answer, and my eccho ring. Early, before the worlds light-giving lampe His golden beame upon the hils doth spred, Having disperst the nights unchearfull dampe, Doe ye awake, and, with fresh lustyhed, Go to the bowre of my beloved Love, My truest turtle dove. Bid her awake; for Hymen is awake, And long since ready forth his maske to move, With his bright tead that flames with many a flake, And many a bachelor to waite on him, In theyr fresh garments trim. Bid her awake therefore, and soone her dight , For loe! the wished day is come at last, That shall for all the paynes and sorrowes past Pay to her usury of long delight: And whylest she doth her dight, Doe ye to her of ioy and solace sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Bring with you all the nymphes that you can heare, Both of the rivers and the forrests greene, And of the sea that neighbours to her neare, All with gay girlands goodly wel beseene . And let them also with them bring in hand Another gay girland, For my fayre Love, of lillyes and of roses, Bound truelove wize with a blew silke riband. And let them make great store of bridale poses, And let them eke bring store of other flowers, To deck the bridale bowers: And let the ground whereas her foot shall tread, For feare the stones her tender foot should wrong, Be strewd with fragrant flowers all along, And diapred lyke the discolored mead. Which done, doe at her chamber dore awayt, For she will waken strayt; The whiles do ye this song unto her sing, The woods shall to you answer, and your eccho ring;. Ye Nymphes of Mulla, which with carefull heed The silver scaly trouts do tend full well, And greedy pikes which use therein to feed, Those trouts and pikes all others doe excell, And ye likewise which keepe the rushy lake, Where none doo fishes take, Bynd up the locks the which hang scatterd light, And in his waters, which your mirror make, Behold your faces as the christall bright, That when you come whereas my Love doth lie, No blemish she may spie. And eke, ye lightfoot mayds which keepe the dere That on the hoary mountayne use to towre, And the wylde wolves, which seeke them to devoure, With your steele darts doe chace from coming neer, Be also present heere, To helpe to decke her, and to help to sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Wake now, my Love, awake! for it is time: The rosy Morne long since left Tithons bed, All ready to her silver coche to clyme, And Phoebus gins to shew his glorious hed. Hark! how the cheerefull birds do chaunt theyr laies, And carroll of Loves praise: The merry larke hir mattins sings aloft; The thrush replyes; the mavis descant playes; The ouzell@ shrills; the ruddock$ warbles soft; So goodly all agree, with sweet consent, To this dayes meriment. Ah! my deere Love, why doe ye sleepe thus long, When meeter were that ye should now awake, T'awayt the comming of your ioyous make,% And hearken to the birds love-learned song, The deawy leaves among! For they of ioy and pleasance to you sing, That all the woods them answer, and theyr eccho ring. My love is now awake out of her dreame, And her fayre eyes, like stars that dimmed were With darksome cloud, now shew theyr goodly beams More bright then Hesperus his head doth rere. Come now, ye damzels, daughters of delight, Helpe quickly her to dight. But first come, ye fayre Houres, which were begot, In Ioves sweet paradice, of Day and Night, Which doe the seasons of the year allot, And all that ever in this world is fayre Do make and still repayre: And ye three handmayds of the Cyprian Queene, The which doe still adorn her beauties pride, Helpe to adorne my beautifullest bride: And, as ye her array, still throw betweene Some graces to be scene; And, as ye use to Venus, to her sing, The whiles the woods shal answer, and your eccho ring. Now is my Love all ready forth to come: Let all the virgins therefore well awayt, And ye fresh boyes, that tend upon her groome, Prepare your selves, for he is comming strayt. Set all your things in seemely good aray, Fit for so ioyfull day, The ioyfulst day that ever sunne did see. Fair Sun! shew forth thy favourable ray, And let thy lifull heat not fervent be, For feare of burning her sunshyny face, Her beauty to disgrace. O fayrest Phoebus! Father of the Muse! If ever I did honour thee aright, Or sing the thing that mote thy mind delight, Doe not thy servants simple boone refuse, But let this day, let this one day, be mine; Let all the rest be thine. Then I thy soverayne prayses loud wil sing, That all the woods shal answer, and theyr eccho ring. Harke! how the minstrils gin to shrill aloud Their merry musick that resounds from far, The pipe, the tabor, and the trembling croud , That well agree withouten breach or iar. But most of all the damzels doe delite, When they their tymbrels smyte, And thereunto doe daunce and carrol sweet, That all the sences they doe ravish quite; The whyles the boyes run up and downe the street, Crying aloud with strong confused noyce, As if it were one voyce, Hymen, I Hymen, Hymen, they do shout; That even to the heavens theyr shouting shrill Doth reach, and all the firmament doth fill; To which the people, standing all about, As in approvance, doe thereto applaud, And loud advaunce her laud; And evermore they Hymen, Hymen, sing, That all the woods them answer, and theyr eccho ring. Loe! where she comes along with portly pace, Lyke Phoebe, from her chamber of the East, Arysing forth to run her mighty race, Clad all in white, that seems a virgin best. So well it her beseems, that ye would weene Some angell she had beene. Her long loose yellow locks lyke golden wyre, Sprinckled with perle, and perling flowres atweene, Doe lyke a golden mantle her attyre, And, being crowned with a girland greene, Seem lyke some mayden queene. Her modest eyes, abashed to behold So many gazers as on her do stare, Upon the lowly ground affixed are, Ne dare lift up her countenance too bold, But blush to heare her prayses sung so loud, So farre from being proud. Nathlesse doe ye still loud her prayses sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Tell me, ye merchants daughters, did ye see So fayre a creature in your towne before; So sweet, so lovely, and so mild as she, Adornd with beautyes grace and vertues store? Her goodly eyes lyke saphyres shining bright, Her forehead yvory white, Her cheekes lyke apples which the sun hath rudded, Her lips lyke cherries, charming men to byte, Her brest like to a bowl of creame uncrudded , Her paps lyke lyllies budded, Her snowie necke lyke to a marble towre, And all her body like a pallace fayre, Ascending up, with many a stately stayre, To honors seat and chastities sweet bowre. Why stand ye still, ye virgins, in amaze, Upon her so to gaze, Whiles ye forget your former lay to sing, To which the woods did answer, and your eccho ring? But if ye saw that which no eyes can see, The inward beauty of her lively spright, Garnisht with heavenly guifts of high degree, Much more then would ye wonder at that sight, And stand astonisht lyke to those which red Medusaes mazeful bed. There dwells sweet Love, and constant Chastity, Unspotted Fayth, and comely Womanhood, Regard of Honour, and mild Modesty; There Vertue raynes as quecne in royal throne, And giveth lawes alone, The which the base affections doe obay, And yeeld theyr services unto her will; Be thought of tilings uncomely ever may Thereto approch to tempt her mind to ill. Had ye once seene these her celestial threasures, And unrevealed pleasures, Then would ye wonder, and her prayses sing, That all the woods should answer, and your eccho ring. Open the temple gates unto my Love, Open them wide that she may enter in, And all the postes adorne as doth behove, And all the pillours deck with girlands trim, For to receyve this saynt with honour dew, That commeth in to you. With trembling steps and humble reverence, She commeth in before th'Almighties view: Of her, ye virgins, learne obedience, When so ye come into those holy places, To humble your proud faces. Bring her up to th'high altar, that she may The sacred ceremonies there partake, The which do endlesse matrimony make; And let the roring organs loudly play The praises of the Loi'd in lively notes; The whiles, with hollow throates, The choristers the ioyous antheme sing, That all the woods may answer, and their eccho ring. Behold, whiles she before the altar stands, Hearing the holy priest that to her speakes And blesseth her with his two happy hands, How the red roses flush up in her cheekes, And the pure snow with goodly vermill stayne, Like crimsin dyde in grayne: That even the angels, which continually About the sacred altar doe remaine, Forget their service and about her fly, Ofte peeping in her face, that seems more fayre The more they on it stare. But her sad eyes, still fastened on the ground, Are governed with goodly modesty, That suffers not one look to glaunce awry, Which may let in a little thought unsownd. Why blush ye, Love, to give to me your hand, The pledge of all our band? Sing, ye sweet angels, Alleluya sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Now al is done; bring home the bride againe; Bring home the triumph of our victory; Bring home with you the glory of her game, With ioyance bring her and with iollity. Never had man more ioyfull day than this, Whom heaven would heape with blis. Make feast therefore now all this live-long day; This day for ever to me holy is. Poure out the wine without restraint or stay, Poure not by cups, but by the belly full, Poure out to all that wull , And sprinkle all the posts and wals with wine, That they may sweat, and drunken be withall. Crowne ye god Bacchus with a coronall, And Hymen also crowne with wreaths of vine; And let the Graces daunce unto the rest, For they can doo it best: The whiles the maydens doe theyr carroll sing, To which the woods shall answer, and theyr eccho ring. Ring ye the bels, ye yong men of the towne, And leave your wonted labors for this day: This day is holy; doe ye write it downe, That ye for ever it remember may. This day the sunne is in his chiefest hight, With Barnaby the bright , From whence declining daily by degrees, He somewhat loseth of his heat and light, When once the Crab behind his back he sees. But for this time it ill ordained was, To choose the longest day in all the yeare, And shortest night, when longest fitter weare: Yet never day so long, but late would passe. Ring ye the bels to make it weare away, And bonefiers make all day; And daunce about them, and about them sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Ah! when will this long weary day have end, And lende me leave to come unto my Love? How slowly do the houres theyr numbers spend? How slowly does sad Time his feathers move? Hast thee, O fayrest planet, to thy home, Within the Westerne fome: Thy tyred steedes long since have need of rest. Long though it be, at last I see it gloome, And the bright evening-star with golden creast Fayre childe of beauty! glorious lampe of love! That all the host of heaven in rankes doost lead, And guidest lovers through the nights sad dread, How chearefully thou lookest from above, And seemst to laugh atweene thy twinkling light, As ioying in the sight Of these glad many, which for ioy do sing, That all the woods them answer, and their eccho ring! Now ceasse, ye damsels, your delights fore-past; Enough it is that all the day was youres: Now day is doen, and night is nighing fast; Now bring the bryde into the brydall bowres. The night is come; now soon her disaray, And in her bed her lay; Lay her in lillies and in violets, And silken curteins over her display, And odourd sheets, and Arras coverlets. Behold how goodly my faire Love does ly, In proud humility! Like unto Maia, when as Iove her took In Tempe, lying on the flowry gras, Twixt sleepe and wake, after she weary was With bathing in the Acidalian brooke. Now it is night, ye damsels may be gone, And leave my Love alone, And leave likewise your former lay to sing: The woods no more shall answer, nor your eccho ring. Now welcome, Night! thou night so long expected, That long daies labour doest at last defray, And all my cares, which cruell Love collected, Hast sumd in one, and cancelled for aye. Spread thy broad wing over my Love and me, That no man may us see; And in thy sable mantle us enwrap, From feare of perrill and foule horror free. Let no false treason seeke us to entrap, Nor any dread disquiet once annoy The safety of our ioy; But let the night be calme and quietsome, Without tempestuous storms or sad afray; Lyke as when Iove with fayre Alemena lay, When he begot the great Tirynthian groome; Or lyke as when he with thy selfe did lie, And begot Maiesty: And let the mayds and yongmen cease to sing; Ne let the woods them answer, nor theyr eccho ring. Let no lamenting cryes, nor dolefull teares, Be heard all night within, nor yet without: Ne let false whispers, breeding hidden feares, Breake gentle sleepe with misconceived dout. Let no deluding dreames, nor dreadful sights, Make sudden sad affrights: No let house-fyres, nor lightnings helpless harmes, Ne let the Pouke, nor other evill sprights, Ne let mischievous witches with theyr charmes, Ne let hob-goblins, names whose sence we see not, Fray us with things that be not: Let not the shriech-owle, nor the storke, be heard, Nor the night-raven, that still deadly yels, Nor damned ghosts, cald up with mighty spels, Nor griesly vultures, make us once affeard: Ne let th'unpleasant quyre of frogs still croking Make us to wish theyr choking. Let none of these theyr drery accents sing; Ne let the woods them answer, nor theyr eccho ring. But let stil Silence trew night-watches keepe, That sacred Peace may in assurance rayne, And tymely Sleep, when it is tyme to sleepe, May poure his limbs forth on your pleasant playne. The whiles an hundred little winged Loves, Like divers-fethered doves, Shall fly and flutter round about the bed, And in the secret darke, that none reproves, Their prety stealthes shall worke, and snares shall spread To filch away sweet snatches of delight, Conceald through covert night. Ye sonnes of Venus, play your sports at will! For greedy Pleasure, carelesse of your toyes, Thinks more upon her paradise of ioyes, Then what ye do, albe it good or ill. All night, therefore, attend your merry play, For it will soone be day: Now none doth hinder you, that say or sing; Ne will the woods now answer, nor your eccho ring. Who is the same which at my window peepes? Or whose is that faire face that shines so bright? Is it not Cinthia, she that never sleepes, But walkes about high heaven al the night? O fayrest goddesse! do thou not envy My Love with me to spy: For thou likewise didst love, though now unthought, And for a fleece of wooll, which privily The Latmian Shepherd once unto thee brought, His pleasures with thee wrought. Therefore to us be favorable now; And sith of wemens labours thou hast charge, And generation goodly dost enlarge, Encline thy will t'effect our wishfull vow, And the chast womb informe with timely seed, That may our comfort breed: Till which we cease our hopefull hap to sing, Ne let the woods us answer, nor our eccho ring. And thou, great Iuno! which with awful might The lawes of wedlock still dost patronize, And the religion of the faith first plight With sacred rites hast taught to solemnize, And eke for comfort often called art Of women in their smart, Eternally bind thou this lovely band, And all thy blessings unto us impart. And thou, glad Genius! in whose gentle hand The bridale bowre and geniall bed remaine, Without blemish or staine, And the sweet pleasures of theyr loves delight With secret ayde doost succour and supply, Till they bring forth the fruitfull progeny, Send us the timely fruit of this same night, And thou, fayre Hebe! and thou, Hymen free! Grant that it may so be. Till which we cease your further prayse to sing, Ne any woods shall answer, nor your eccho ring. And ye high heavens, the temple of the gods, In which a thousand torches flaming bright Doe burne, that to us wretched earthly clods In dreadful darknesse lend desired light, And all ye powers which in the same remayne, More than we men can fayne, Poure out your blessing on us plentiously, And happy influence upon us raine, That we may raise a large posterity, Which from the earth, which they may long possesse With lasting happinesse, Up to your haughty pallaces may mount, And for the guerdon of theyr glorious merit, May heavenly tabernacles there inherit, Of blessed saints for to increase the count. So let us rest, sweet Love, in hope of this, And cease till then our tymely ioyes to sing: The woods no more us answer, nor our eccho ring! Song, made in lieu of many ornaments With which my Love should duly have been dect, Which cutting off through hasty accidents, Ye would not stay your dew time to expect, But promist both to recompens, Be unto her a goodly ornament, And for short time an endlesse moniment! Calme was the day, and through the trembling ayre Sweete-breathing Zephyrus did softly play A gentle spirit, that lightly did delay Hot Titans beames, which then did glyster fayre; When I whom sullein care, Through discontent of my long fruitlesse stay In princes court, and expectation vayne Of idle hopes, which still doe fly away Like empty shadows, did afflict my brayne, Walkt forth to ease my payne Along the shoare of silver streaming Themmes; Whose rutty bank, the which his river hemmes, Was paynted all with variable flowers, And all the meades adornd with dainty gemmes, Fit to decke maydens bowres, And crowne their paramours Against the brydale day, which is not long@: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. There, in a meadow by the rivers side, A flocke of Nymphes I chaunced to espy, All lovely daughters of the flood thereby, With goodly greenish locks, all loose untyde, As each had bene a bryde; And each one had a little wicker basket, Made of fine twigs, entrayled curiously, In which they gathered flowers to fill their flasket , And with fine fingers cropt full feateously@ The tender stalkes on hye. Of every sort which in that meadow grew They gathered some; the violet, pallid blew, The little dazie, that at evening closes, The virgin lillie, and the primrose trew, With store of vermeil roses, To deck their bridegroomes posies Against the brydale day, which was not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. With that I saw two Swannes of goodly hewe Come softly swimming downe along the lee : Two fairer birds I yet did never see; The snow which doth the top of Pindus strew Did never whiter shew, Nor Jove himselfe, when he a swan would be For love of Leda, whiter did appear; Yet Leda was, they say, as white as he, Yet not so white as these, nor nothing near: So purely white they were, That even the gentle stream, the which them bare, Seem'd foule to them, and bad his billowes spare To wet their silken feathers, least they might Soyle their fayre plumes with water not so fayre, And marre their beauties bright, That shone as heavens light, Against their brydale day, which was not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. Eftsoones, the Nymphes, which now had flowers their fill, Ran all in haste to see that silver brood, As they came floating on the cristal flood; Whom when they sawe, they stood amazed still, Their wondring eyes to fill. Them seem'd they never saw a sight so fayre Of fowles, so lovely, that they sure did deeme Them heavenly borne, or to be that same payre Which through the skie draw Venus stiver teeme; For sure they did not seeme To be begot of any earthly seede, But rather angels, or of angels breede; Yet were they bred of Somers-heat, they say, In sweetest season, when each flower and weede The earth did fresh aray; So fresh they seem'd as day, Even as their brydale day, which was not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. Then forth they all out of their baskets drew Great store of flowers, the honour of the field, That to the sense did fragrant odours yeild, All which upon those goodly birds they threw, And all the waves did strew, That like old Peneus waters they did seeme, When downe along by pleasant Tempes shore, Scattred with flowres, through Thessaly they streeme, That they appeare, through lillies plenteous store, Like a brydes chamber flore. Two of those Nymphes, meane while, two garlands bound Of freshest flowres which in that mead they found, The which presenting all in trim array, Their snowie foreheads therewithall they crownd, Whilst one did sing this lay, Prepar'd against that day, Against their brydale day, which was not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. Ye gentle Birdes! the worlds faire ornament, And heavens glorie, whom this happie hower Doth leade unto your lovers blissfull bower, Ioy may you have, and gentle hearts content Of your loves couplement; And let faire Venus, that is Queene of Love, With her heart-quelling sonne upon you smile, Whose smile, they say, hath vertue to remove All loves dislike, and friendships faultie guile For ever to assoile . Let endlesse peace your steadfast hearts accord, And blessed plentie wait upon your bord; And let your bed with pleasures chast abound. That fruitfull issue may to you afford, Which may your foes confound, And make your ioyes redound Upon your brydale day, which is not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softlie, till I end my song. So ended she; and all the rest around To her redoubled that her undersong , Which said, their brydale daye should not be long: And gentle Eccho from the neighbour ground Their accents did resound. So forth those ioyous birdes did passe along Adowne the lee, that to them murmurde low, As he would speake, but that he lackt a tong, Yet did by signes his glad affection show, Making his streame run slow. And all the foule which in his flood did dwell Gan flock about these twaine, that did excell The rest so far as Cynthia doth shend The lesser stars. So they, enranged well, Did on those two attend, And their best service lend Against their wedding day, which was not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. At length they all to mery London came, To mery London, my most kyndly nurse, That to me gave this lifes first native sourse, Though from another place I take my name, An house of auncient fame. There when they came whereas those bricky towres The which on Themmes brode aged backe doe ryde, Where now the studious lawyers have their bowers. There whylome wont the Templer Knights to byde, Till they decayd through pride, Next whereunto there standes a stately place, Where oft I gayned giftes and goodly grace Of that great lord which therein wont to dwell, Whose want too well now feels my freendles case: But ah! here fits not well Olde woes, but ioyes, to tell, Against the bridale daye, which is not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. Yet therein now doth lodge a noble peer, Great Englands glory and the worlds wide wonder, Whose dreadfull name late through all Spaine did thunder, And Hercules two pillors standing neere Did make to quake and feare. Faire branch of honor, flower of chevalrie! That fillest England with thy triumphs fame, Ioy have thou of thy noble victorie, And endlesse happinesse of thine owne name, That promiseth the same; That through thy prowesse and victorious armes Thy country may be freed from forraine harmes, And great Elisaes glorious name may ring Through al the world, fil'd with thy wide alarmes. Which some brave Muse may sing To ages following, Upon the brydale day, which is not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. From those high towers this noble lord issuing, Like radiant Hesper, when his golden hayre In th'ocean billowes he hath bathed fayre, Descended to the rivers open vewing, With a great traine ensuing. Above the rest were goodly to bee scene Two gentle Knights of lovely face and feature, Beseeming well the bower of any queene, With gifts of wit and ornaments of nature Fit for so goodly stature, That like the twins of Iove they seem'd in sight, Which decke the bauldricke of the heavens bright. They two, forth pacing to the rivers side, Receiv'd those two faire brides, their loves delight; Which, at th'appointed tyde, Each one did make his bryde Against their brydale day, which is not long: Sweet Themmes! runne softly, till I end my song. In all humble service, Love, that long since hast to thy mighty powre Perforce subdude my poor captived hart, And raging now therein with restlesse stowre , Doest tyrannize in everie weaker part, Faine would I seeke to ease my bitter smart By any service I might do to thee, Or ought that else might to thee pleasing bee. And now t'asswage the force of this new flame, And make thee more propitious in my need, I meane to sing the praises of thy name, And thy victorious conquests to areed , By which thou madest many harts to bleed Of mighty victors, with wide wounds embrewed, And by thy cruell darts to thee subdewed. Onely I fear my wits, enfeebled late Through the sharp sorrowes which thou hast me bred, Should faint, and words should faile me to relate The wondrous triumphs of thy great god-hed: But, if thou wouldst vouchsafe to overspred Me with the shadow of thy gentle wing, I should enabled be thy actes to sing. Come, then, O come, thou mightie God of Love! Out of thy silver bowres and secret blisse, Where thou dost sit in Venus lap above, Bathing thy wings in her ambrosial kisse, That sweeter farre than any nectar is, Come softly, and my feeble breast inspire With gentle furie, kindled of thy fire. And ye, sweet Muses! which have often proved The piercing points of his avengefull darts, And ye, fair Nimphs! which oftentimes have loved The cruel worker of your kindly smarts, Prepare yourselves, and open wide your harts For to receive the triumph of your glorie, That made you merie oft when ye were sorrie. And ye, faire blossoms of youths wanton breed! Which in the conquests of your beautie bost, Wherewith your lovers feeble eyes you feed, But sterve their harts, that needeth nourture most, Prepare your selves to march amongst his host, And all the way this sacred hymne do sing, Made in the honor of your soveraigne king. Great God of Might, that reignest in the mynd, And all the bodie to thy hest doest frame, Victor of gods, subduer of mankynd, That doest the lions and fell tigers tame, Making their cruell rage thy scornfull game, And in their roring taking great delight, Who can expresse the glorie of thy might? Or who alive can perfectly declare The wondrous cradle of thine infancie, When thy great mother Venus first thee bare, Though elder then thine own nativitie, And yet a chyld, renewing still thy yeares, And yet the eldest of the heavenly peares? For ere this worlds still moving mightie masse Out of great Chaos ugly prison crept, In which his goodly face long hidden was From heavens view, and in deep darknesse kept, Love, that had now long time securely slept In Venus lap, unarmed then and naked, Gan reare his head, by Clotho being waked: And taking to him wings of his own heat, Kindled at first from heavens life-giving fyre, He gan to move out of his idle seat; Weakly at first, but after with desyre Lifted aloft, he gan to mount up hyre , And, like fresh eagle, made his hardy flight Thro all that great wide wast, yet wanting light. Yet wanting light to guide his wandring way, His own faire mother, for all creatures sake, Did lend him light from her owne goodly ray; Then through the world his way he gan to take, The world, that was not till he did it make, Whose sundrie parts he from themselves did sever. The which before had lyen confused ever. The earth, the ayre, the water, and the fyre, Then gan to raunge themselves in huge array, And with contrry forces to conspyre Each against other by all meanes they may, Threatning their owne confusion and decay: Ayre hated earth, and water hated fyre, Till Love relented their rebellious yre. He then them tooke, and, tempering goodly well Their contrary dislikes with loved meanes, Did place them all in order, and compell To keepe themselves within their sundrie raines , Together linkt with adamantine chaines; Yet so as that in every living wight They mix themselves, and shew their kindly might. So ever since they firmely have remained, And duly well observed his beheast; Through which now all these things that are contained Within this goodly cope, both most and least, Their being have, and daily are increast Through secret sparks of his infused fyre, Which in the barraine cold he doth inspyre. Thereby they all do live, and moved are To multiply the likenesse of their kynd, Whilest they seeke onely, without further care, To quench the flame which they in burning fynd; But man, that breathes a more immortall mynd, Not for lusts sake, but for eternitie, Seekes to enlarge his lasting progenie. For having yet in his deducted spright Some sparks remaining of that heavenly fyre, He is enlumind with that goodly light, Unto like goodly semblant to aspyre; Therefore in choice of love he doth desyre That seemes on earth most heavenly to embrace, That same is Beautie, borne of heavenly race. For sure, of all that in this mortall frame Contained is, nought more divine doth seeme, Or that resembleth more th'immortall flame Of heavenly light, than Beauties glorious beam. What wonder then, if with such rage extreme Frail men, whose eyes seek heavenly things to see, At sight thereof so much enravisht bee? Which well perceiving, that imperious boy Doth therewith tip his sharp empoisned darts, Which glancing thro the eyes with countenance coy Kest not till they have pierst the trembling harts, And kindled flame in all their inner parts, Which suckes the blood, and drinketh up the lyfe, Of carefull wretches with consuming griefe. Thenceforth they playne, and make full piteous mone Unto the author of their balefull bane: The daies they waste, the nights they grieve and grone, Their lives they loath, and heavens light disdaine; No light but that whose lampe doth yet remaine Fresh burning in the image of their eye, They deigne to see, and seeing it still dye. The whylst thou, tyrant Love, doest laugh and scorne At their complaints, making their paine thy play; Whylest they lye languishing like thrals forlorne, The whyles thou doest triumph in their decay; And otherwhyles, their dying to delay, Thou doest emmarble the proud hart of her Whose love before their life they doe prefer. So hast thou often done ay me the more! To me thy vassall, whose yet bleeding hart With thousand wounds thou mangled hast so sore, That whole remaines scarse any little part; Yet to augment the anguish of my smart, Thou hast enfrosen her disdainefull brest, That no one drop of pitie there doth rest. Why then do I this honor unto thee, Thus to ennoble thy victorious name, Sith thou doest shew no favour unto mee, Ne once move ruth in that rebellious dame, Somewhat to slacke the rigour of my flame? Certes small glory doest thou winne hereby, To let her live thus free, and me to dy. But if thou be indeede, as men thee call, The worlds great parent, the most kind preserver Of living wights, the soveraine lord of all, How falles it then that with thy furious fervour Thou doest afflict as well the not-deserver, As him that doeth thy lovely heasts despize, And on thy subiects most doth tyrannize? Yet herein eke thy glory seemeth more, By so hard handling those which best thee serve, That, ere thou doest them unto grace restore, Thou mayest well trie if they will ever swerve, And mayest them make it better to deserve, And, having got it, may it more esteeme; For things hard gotten men more dearely deeme. So hard those heavenly beauties be enfyred, As things divine least passions doe impresse; The more of stedfast mynds to be admyred, The more they stayed be on stedfastnesse; But baseborne minds such lamps regard the lesse, Which at first blowing take not hastie fyre; Such fancies feele no love, but loose desyre. For Love is lord of truth and loialtie, Lifting himself out of the lowly dust On golden plumes up to the purest skie, Above the reach of loathly sinfull lust, Whose base affect , through cowardly distrust Of his weake wings, dare not to heaven fly, But like a moldwarpe in the earth doth ly. His dunghill thoughts, which do themselves enure To dirtie drosse, no higher dare aspyre; Ne can his feeble earthly eyes endure The flaming light of that celestiall fyre Which kindleth love in generous desyre, And makes him mount above the native might Of heavie earth, up to the heavens hight. Such is the powre of that sweet passion, That it all sordid basenesse doth expell, And the refyned mynd doth newly fashion Unto a fairer forme, which now doth dwell In his high thought, that would it selfe excell; Which he beholding still with constant sight, Admires the mirrour of so heavenly light. Whose image printing in his deepest wit, He thereon feeds his hungrie fantasy, Still full, yet never satisfyde with it; Like Tantale, that in store doth sterved ly, So doth he pine in most satiety; For nought may quench his infinite desyre, Once kindled through that first conceived fyre. Thereon his mynd affixed wholly is, Ne thinks on ought but how it to attaine; His care, his ioy, his hope, is all on this, That seemes in it all blisses to containe, In sight whereof all other blisse seemes vaine: Thrice happie man, might he the same possesse, He faines himselfe, and doth his fortune blesse. And though he do not win his wish to end, Yet thus farre happie he himselfe doth weene, That heavens such happie grace did to him lend As thing on earth so heavenly to have seene, His harts enshrined saint, his heavens queene, Fairer then fairest in his fayning eye, Whose sole aspect he counts felicitye. Then forth he casts in his unquiet thought, What he may do her favour to obtaine; What brave exploit, what perill hardly wrought, What puissant conquest, what adventurous paine, May please her best, and grace unto him gaine; He dreads no danger, nor misfortune feares, His faith, his fortune, in his breast he beares. Thou art his god, thou art his mightie guyde, Thou, being blind, letst him not see his feares, But carriest him to that which he had eyde, With which thou armest his resistlesse hand. Witnesse Leander in the Euxine waves, And stout Aeneas in the Troiane fyre, Achilles preassing through the Phrygian glaives , And Orpheus, daring to provoke the yre Of damned fiends, to get his love retyre; For both through heaven and hell thou makest way, To win them worship which to thee obay. And if by all these perils and these paynes He may but purchase lyking in her eye, What heavens of ioy then to himselfe he faynes! Eftsoones he wypes quite out of memory Whatever ill before he did aby : Had it beene death, yet would he die againe, To live thus happie as her grace to gaine. Yet when he hath found favour to his will, He nathmore can so contented rest, But forceth further on, and striveth still T'approch more neare, till in her inmost brest He may embosomd bee and loved best; And yet not best, but to be lov'd alone; For love cannot endure a paragone . The fear whereof, O how doth it torment His troubled mynd with more then hellish paine! And to his fayning fansie represent Sights never seene, and thousand shadowes vaine, To breake his sleepe and waste his ydle braine: Thou that hast never lov'd canst not beleeve Least part of th'evils which poore lovers greeve. The gnawing envie, the hart-fretting feare, The vaine surmizes, the distrustfull showes, The false reports that flying tales doe beare, The doubts, the daungers, the delayes, the woes, The fayned friends, the unassured foes, With thousands more then any tongue can tell, Doe make a lovers life a wretches hell. Yet is there one more cursed then they all, That cancker-worme, that monster, Gelosie, Which eates the heart and feedes upon the gall, Turning all Loves delight to miserie, Through feare of losing his felicitie. Ah, gods! that ever ye that monster placed In gentle Love, that all his ioyes defaced! By these, O Love! thou doest thy entrance make Unto thy heaven, and doest the more endeere Thy pleasures unto those which them partake, As after stormes, when clouds begin to cleare, The sunne more bright and glorious doth appeare; So thou thy folke, through paines of Purgatorie, Dost beare unto thy blisse, and heavens glorie. There thou them placest in a paradize Of all delight and ioyous happy rest, Where they doe feede on nectar heavenly-wize, With Hercules and Hebe, and the rest Of Venus dearlings, through her bountie blest; And lie like gods in yvory beds arayd, With rose and lillies over them displayd. There with thy daughter Pleasure they doe play Their hurtlesse sports, without rebuke or blame, And in her snowy bosome boldly lay Their quiet heads, devoyd of guilty shame, After full ioyance of their gentle game; Then her they crowne their goddesse and their queene, And decke with floures thy altars well beseene. Ay me! deare Lord, that ever I might hope, For all the paines and woes that I endure, To come at length unto the wished scope Of my desire, or might myselfe assure That happie port for ever to recure ! Then would I thinke these paines no paines at all, And all my woes to be but penance small. Then would I sing of thine immortal praise An heavenly hymne such as the angels sing, And thy triumphant name then would I raise Bove all the gods, thee only honoring; My guide, my god, my victor, and my king: Till then, drad Lord! vouchsafe to take of me This simple song, thus fram'd in praise of thee. Ah! whither, Love! wilt thou now carry mee? What wontlesse fury dost thou now inspire Into my feeble breast, too full of thee? Whylest seeking to aslake thy raging fyre, Thou in me kindlest much more great desyre, And up aloft above my strength doth rayse The wondrous matter of my fire to praise. That as I earst in praise of thine owne name, So now in honour of thy mother deare An honourable hymne I eke should frame, And, with the brightnesse of her beautie cleare, The ravisht hearts of gazefull men might reare To admiration of that heavenly light, From whence proceeds such soule-enchanting might. Therto do thou, great Goddesse! Queene of Beauty, Mother of Love and of all worlds delight, Without whose soverayne grace and kindly dewty Nothing on earth seems fayre to fleshly sight, Doe thou vouchsafe with thy love-kindling light T'illuminate my dim and dulled eyne, And beautifie this sacred hymne of thyne: That both to thee, to whom I meane it most, And eke to her whose faire immortall beame Hath darted fyre into my feeble ghost, That now it wasted is with woes extreame, It may so please, that she at length will streame Some deaw of grace into my withered hart, After long sorrow and consuming smart. To make al things such as we now behold, It seems that he before his eyes had plast A goodly paterne, to whose perfect mould He fashiond them as comely as he could, That now so faire and seemely they appeare As nought may be amended any wheare. That wondrous paterne, wheresoere it bee, Whether in earth layd up in secret store, Or else in heaven, that no man may it see With sinfull eyes, for feare it do deflore, Is perfect Beautie, which all men adore; Whose face and feature doth so much excell All mortal sence, that none the same may tell. Thereof as every earthly thing partakes Or more or lesse, by influence divine, So it more faire accordingly it makes, And the grosse matter of this earthly myne Which closeth it thereafter doth refyne, Doing away the drosse which dims the light Of that faire beame which therein is empight . For, through infusion of celestiall powre, The duller earth it quickneth with delight, And life-full spirits privily doth powre Through all the parts, that to the lookers sight They seeme to please; that is thy soveraine might, O Cyprian queene! which, flowing from the beame Of thy bright starre, thou into them doest streame. That is the thing which giveth pleasant grace To all things faire, that kindleth lively fyre; Light of thy lampe; which, shyning in the face, Thence to the soule darts amorous desyre, And robs the harts of those which it admyre; Therewith thou pointest thy sons poysned arrow, That wounds the life and wastes the inmost marrow. How vainely then do ydle wits invent That Beautie is nought else but mixture made Of colours faire, and goodly temp'rament Of pure complexions, that shall quickly fade And passe away, like to a sommers shade; Or that it is but comely composition Of parts well measurd, with meet disposition! Hath white and red in it such wondrous powre, That it can pierce through th'eyes unto the hart, And therein stirre such rage and restlesse stowre , As nought but death can stint his dolours smart? Or can proportion of the outward part Move such affection in the inward mynd, That it can rob both sense, and reason blynd? Why doe not then the blossomes of the field, Which are arayd with much more orient hew, And to the sense most daintie odours yield, Worke like impression in the lookers vew? Or why doe not faire pictures like powre shew, In which oft-times we Nature see of Art Exceld, in perfect limming every part? But ah! beleeve me there is more then so, That workes such wonders in the minds of men; I, that have often prov'd, too well it know, And who so list the like assayes to ken Shall find by trial, and confesse it then, That Beautie is not, as fond men misdeeme, An outward shew of things that onely seeme. For that same goodly hew of white and red With which the cheekes are sprinckled, shall decay, And those sweete rosy leaves, so fairly spred Upon the lips, shall fade and fall away To that they were, even to corrupted clay: That golden wyre, those sparckling stars so bright, Shall turne to dust, and lose their goodly light. But that faire lampe, from whose celestiall ray That light proceedes which kindleth lovers fire, Shall never be extinguisht nor decay; But, when the vitall spirits doe espyre, Unto her native planet shall retyre; For it is heavenly borne, and cannot die, Being a parcell of the purest skie. For when the soule, the which derived was, At first, out of that great immortall Spright, By whom all live to love, whilome did pas Down from the top of purest heavens hight To be embodied here, it then tooke light And lively spirits from that fayrest starre Which lights the world forth from his firie carre. Which powre retayning still, or more or lesse, When she in fleshly seede is eft enraced , Through every part she doth the same impresse, According as the heavens have her graced, And frames her house, in which she will be placed, Fit for her selfe, adorning it with spoyle Of th'heavenly riches which she robd erewhyle. Thereof it comes that these faire soules which have The most resemblance of that heavenly light Frame to themselves most beautifull and brave Their fleshly bowre, most fit for their delight, And the grosse matter by a soveraine might Temper so trim, that it may well be seene A pallace fit for such a virgin queene. So every spirit, as it is most pure, And hath in it the more of heavenly light, So it the fairer bodie doth procure To habit in, and it more fairely dight With chearfull grace and amiable sight: For of the soule the bodie forme doth take; For soule is forme, and doth the bodie make. Therefore, where-ever that thou doest behold A comely corpse , with beautie faire endewed, Know this for certaine, that the same doth hold A beauteous soule with fair conditions thewed , Fit to receive the seede of vertue strewed; For all that faire is, is by nature good; That is a sign to know the gentle blood. Yet oft it falles that many a gentle mynd Dwels in deformed tabernacle drownd, Either by chaunce, against the course of kynd , Or through unaptnesse in the substance fownd, Which it assumed of some stubborne grownd, That will not yield unto her formes direction, But is deform'd with some foule imperfection. And oft it falles, ay me, the more to rew! That goodly Beautie, albe heavenly borne, Is foule abusd, and that celestiall hew, Which doth the world with her delight adorne, Made but the bait of sinne, and sinners scorne, Whilest every one doth seeke and sew to have it, But every one doth seeke but to deprave it. Yet nathmore is that faire Beauties blame, But theirs that do abuse it unto ill: Nothing so good, but that through guilty shame May be corrupt , and wrested unto will. Nathelesse the soule is faire and beauteous still, However fleshes fault it filthy make; For things immortall no corruption take. But ye, faire Dames! the worlds deare ornaments, And lively images of heavens light, Let not your beames with such disparagements Doe still preserve your first informed grace, Whose shadow yet shynes in your beauteous face. Loath that foule blot, that hellish firbrand, Disloiall lust, fair Beauties foulest blame, That base affections, which your eares would bland , Commend to you by loves abused name, But is indeede the bondslave of defame; Which will the garland of your glorie marre, And quench the light of your brightshyning starre. But gentle Love, that loiall is and trew, Wil more illumine your resplendent ray, And add more brightnesse to your goodly hew From light of his pure fire; which, by like way Kindled of yours, your likenesse doth display; Like as two mirrours, by opposd reflection, Doe both expresse the faces first impression. Therefore, to make your beautie more appeare, It you behoves to love, and forth to lay That heavenly riches which in you ye beare, That men the more admyre their fountaine may; For else what booteth that celestiall ray, If it in darknesse be enshrined ever, That it of loving eyes be vewed never? But, in your choice of loves, this well advize, That likest to your selves ye them select, The which your forms first sourse may sympathize, And with like beauties parts be inly deckt; For if you loosely love without respect, It is not love, but a discordant warre, Whose unlike parts amongst themselves do iarre. For love is a celestiall harmonie Of likely harts composd of starres concent, Which ioyne together in sweete sympathie, To work each others ioy and true content, Which they have harbourd since their first descent Out of their heavenly bowres, where they did see And know ech other here belov'd to bee. Then wrong it were that any other twaine Should in Loves gentle band combyned bee, But those whom Heaven did at first ordaine, And made out of one mould the more t'agree; For all that like the beautie which they see Straight do not love; for Love is not so light As straight to burne at first beholders sight. But they which love indeede looke otherwise, With pure regard and spotlesse true intent, Drawing out of the obiect of their eyes A more refyned form, which they present Unto their mind, voide of all blemishment; Which it reducing to her first perfection, Beholdeth free from fleshes frayle infection. And then conforming it unto the light Which in it selfe it hath remaining still, Of that first sunne, yet sparckling in his sight, Thereof he fashions in his higher skill An heavenly beautie to his fancies will; And it embracing in his mind entyre, The mirrour of his owne thought doth admyre. Which seeing now so inly faire to be, As outward it appeareth to the eye, And with his spirits proportion to agree, He thereon fixeth all his fantasie, And fully setteth his felicitie; Counting it fairer then it is indeede, And yet indeede her fairnesse doth exeede. For lovers eyes more sharply sighted bee Then other mens, and in deare loves delight See more then any other eyes can see, Through mutuall receipt of beams bright, Which carrie privie message to the spright, And to their eyes that inmost faire display, As plaine as light discovers dawning day. Therein they see, through amorous eye-glaunces, Annies of Loves still flying too and fro, Which dart at them their litle fierie launces; Whom having wounded, back againe they go, Carrying compassion to their lovely foe; Who, seeing her faire eyes so sharp effect, Cures all their sorrowes with one sweete aspect. In which how many wonders doe they reede To their conceipt, that others never see! Now of her smiles, with which their soules they feede, Like gods with nectar in their bankets free; Now of her lookes, which like to cordials bee; But when her words embssade forth she sends, Lord, how sweete musicke that unto them lends! Sometimes upon her forhead they behold A thousand graces masking in delight; Sometimes within her eye-lids they unfold Ten thousand sweet belgards , which to their sight Doe seeme like twinckling starres in frostie night; But on her lips, like rosy buds in May, So many millions of chaste pleasures play. All those, O Cytherea! and thousands more, Thy handmaides be, which do on thee attend, To decke thy beautie with their dainties store, That may it more to mortall eyes commend, And make it more admyr'd of foe and frend; And spred thy lovely kingdome over all. Then I, tryumph! O great Beauties Queene, Advance the banner of thy conquest hie, That all this world, the which thy vassels beene, May draw to thee, and with dew faltie Adore the powre of thy great maiestie, Singing this hymne in honour of thy name, Compyld by me, which thy poor liegeman am! In lieu whereof graunt, O great soveraine! My trembling hart in her eternall chaine, One drop of grace at length will to me give, That I her bounden thrall by her may live, And this same life, which first fro me she reaved, May owe to her, of whom I it receaved. And you, faire Venus dearling, my dear dread! Fresh flowre of grace, great goddesse of my life, When your faire eyes these fearfull lines shall read, Deigne to let fall one drop of dew reliefe, That may recure my harts long pyning griefe, And shew what wondrous powre your beauty hath, That can restore a damned wight from death. Love, lift me up upon thy golden wings From this base world unto thy heavens hight, Where I may see those admirable things Which there thou workest by thy soveraine might, Farre above feeble reach of earthly sight, That I thereof an heavenly hymne may sing Unto the God of Love, high heavens king. Many lewd layes ah! woe is me the more! In praise of that mad fit which fooles call Love, I have in th'heat of youth made heretofore, That in light wits did loose affection move; But all those follies now I do reprove, And turned have the tenor of my string, The heavenly prayses of true Love to sing. And ye that wont with greedy vaine desire To reade my fault, and, wondring at my flame, To warme your selves at my wide sparckling fire, Sith now that heat is quenched, quench my blame, And in her ashes shrowd my dying shame; For who my passed follies now pursewes, Beginnes his owne, and my old fault renewes. Are now containd, found any being-place, Ere flitting Time could wag his eyas wings About that mightie bound which doth embrace The rolling spheres, and parts their houres by space, That high eternall Powre, which now doth move In all these things, mov'd in it selfe by love. It lovd it selfe, because it selfe was faire; For fair is lov'd; and of it self begot Like to it selfe his eldest Sonne and Heire, Eternall, pure, and voide of sinfull blot, The firstling of his ioy, in whom no iot Of loves dislike or pride was to be found, Whom he therefore with equall honour crownd. With him he raignd, before all time prescribed, In endlesse glorie and immortall might, Together with that Third from them derived, Most wise, most holy, most almightie Spright! Whose kingdomes throne no thoughts of earthly wight Can comprehend, much lesse my trembling verse With equall words can hope it to reherse. Yet, O most blessed Spirit! pure lampe of light, Eternall spring of grace and wisedom trew, Vouchsafe to shed into my barren spright Some little drop of thy celestiall dew, That may my rymes with sweet infuse embrew, And give me words equall unto my thought, To tell the marveiles by thy mercie wrought. Yet being pregnant still with powrefull grace, And full of fruitfull Love, that loves to get Things like himselfe and to enlarge his race, His second brood, though not of powre so great, Yet full of beautie, next he did beget, An infinite increase of angels bright, All glistring glorious in their Makers light. To them the heavens illimitable hight Not this round heaven which we from hence behold, Adornd with thousand lamps of burning light, And with ten thousand gemmes of shyning gold He gave as their inheritance to hold, That they might serve him in eternall blis, And be partakers of those ioyes of his. There they in their trinall triplicities About him wait, and on his will depend, Either with nimble wings to cut the skies, When he them on his messages doth send, Or on his owne dread presence to attend, Where they behold the glorie of his light, And caroll hymnes of love both day and night. Both day and night is unto them all one; For he his beames doth unto them extend, That darknesse there appeareth never none; Ne hath their day, ne hath their blisse, an end, But there their termelesse time in pleasure spend; Ne ever should their happinesse decay, Had not they dar'd their Lord to disobay. But pride, impatient of long resting peace, Did puffe them up with greedy bold ambition, That they gan cast their state how to increase Above the fortune of their first condition, And sit in Gods own seat without commission: The brightest angel, even the Child of Light , Drew millions more against their God to fight. Th'Almighty, seeing their so bold assay, Kindled the flame of his consuming yre, And with his onely breath them blew away From heavens hight, to which they did aspyre, To deepest hell, and lake of damned fyre, Where they in darknesse and dread horror dwell, Hating the happie light from which they fell. So that next off-spring of the Makers love, Next to himselfe in glorious degree, Degendering to hate, fell from above Through pride; for pride and love may ill agree; And now of sinne to all ensample bee: How then can sinfull flesh it selfe assure, Sith purest angels fell to be impure? But that Eternall Fount of love and grace, Still flowing forth his goodnesse unto all, Now seeing left a waste and emptie place In his wyde pallace through those angels fall, Cast to supply the same, and to enstall A new unknowen colony therein, Whose root from earths base groundworke should begin. Therefore of clay, base, vile, and nest to nought, Yet form'd by wondrous skill, and by his might According to an heavenly patterne wrought, Which he had fashiond in his wise foresight, He man did make, and breathd a living spright Into his face, most beautifull and fayre, Endewd with wisedomes riches, heavenly, rare. Such he him made, that he resemble might Himselfe, as mortall thing immortall could; Him to be lord of every living wight He made by love out of his owne like mould, In whom he might his mightie selfe behould; For Love doth love the thing belov'd to see, That like it selfe in lovely shape may bee. But man, forgetfull of his Makers grace No lesse than angels, whom he did ensew, Fell from the hope of promist heavenly place, Into the mouth of Death, to sinners dew, And all his off-spring into thraldome threw, Where they for ever should in bonds remaine Of never-dead, yet ever-dying paine; Till that great Lord of Love, which him at first Made of meere love, and after liked well, Seeing him lie like creature long accurst In that deep horor of despeyred hell, Him, wretch, in doole would let no lenger dwell, But cast out of that bondage to redeeme, And pay the price, all@ were his debt extreeme. Out of the bosome of eternall blisse, In which he reigned with his glorious Syre, He downe descended, like a most demisse And abiect thrall, in fleshes fraile attyre, That he for him might pay sinnes deadly hyre, And him restore unto that happie state In which he stood before his haplesse fate. In flesh at first the guilt committed was, Therefore in flesh it must be satisfyde; Nor spirit, nor angel, though they man surpas, Could make amends to God for mans misguyde, But onely man himselfe, who selfe did slyde: So, taking flesh of sacred virgins wombe, For mans deare sake he did a man become. And that most blessed bodie, which was borne Without all blemish or reprochfull blame, He freely gave to be both rent and torne Of cruell hands, who with despightfull shame Revyling him, that them most vile became, At length him nayled on a gallow-tree, And slew the iust by most uniust decree. O huge and most unspeakeable impression Of Loves deep wound, that pierst the piteous hart Of that deare Lord with so entyre affection, And, sharply launcing every inner part, Dolours of death into his soule did dart, Doing him die that never it deserved, To free his foes, that from his heast had swerved! What hart can feel least touch of so sore launch, Or thought can think the depth of so deare wound? Whose bleeding sourse their streames yet never staunch, But stil do flow, and freshly still redownd , To heale the sores of sinfull soules unsound, And clense the guilt of that infected cryme, Which was enrooted in all fleshly slyme. O blessed Well of Love! O Floure of Grace! O glorious Morning-Starre! O Lampe of Light! Most lively image of thy Fathers face, Meeke Lambe of God, before all worlds behight , How can we thee requite for all this good? Or what can prize that thy most precious blood? Yet nought thou ask'st in lieu of all this love But love of us, for guerdon of thy paine: Ay me! what can us lesse than that behove? Had he required life for us againe, Had it beene wrong to ask his owne with game? He gave us life, he it restored lost; Then life were least, that us so little cost. But he our life hath left unto us free, Free that was thrall, and blessed that was band ; Ne ought demaunds but that we loving bee, As he himselfe hath lov'd us afore-hand, And bound therto with an eternall band; Him first to love that was so dearely bought, And next our brethren, to his image wrought. Him first to love great right and reason is, Who first to us our life and being gave, And after, when we fared had amisse, Us wretches from the second death did save; And last, the food of life, which now we have, Even he himselfe, in his dear sacrament, To feede our hungry soules, unto us lent. Then next, to love our brethren, that were made Of that selfe mould and that self Maker's hand That we, and to the same againe shall fade, Where they shall have like heritage of land, However here on higher steps we stand, Which also were with selfe-same price redeemed That we, however of us light esteemed. And were they not, yet since that loving Lord Commaunded us to love them for his sake, Even for his sake, and for his sacred word Which in his last bequest he to us spake, We should them love, and with their needs partake; Knowing that whatsoere to them we give We give to him by whom we all doe live. Such mercy he by his most holy reede Unto us taught, and, to approve it trew, Ensampled it by his most righteous deede, Shewing us mercie, miserable crew! That we the like should to the wretches shew, And love our brethren; thereby to approve How much himselfe that loved us we love. Then rouze thy selfe, O Earth! out of thy soyle , In which thou wallowest like to filthy swyne, And doest thy mynd in durty pleasures moyle , Unmindfull of that dearest Lord of thyne; Lift up to him thy heavie clouded eyne, That thou this soveraine bountie mayst behold, And read, through love, his mercies manifold. Beginne from first, where he encradled was In simple cratch , wrapt in a wad of hay, Betweene the toylfull oxe and humble asse, And in what rags, and in how base aray, The glory of our heavenly riches lay, When him the silly shepheards came to see, Whom greatest princes sought on lowest knee. From thence reade on the storie of his life, His humble carriage, his unfaulty wayes, His cancred foes, his fights, his toyle, his strife, His paines, his povertie, his sharpe assayes, Through which he past his miserable dayes, Offending none, and doing good to all, Yet being malist both by great and small. And look at last, how of most wretched wights He taken was, betrayd, and false accused; How with most scornfull taunts and fell despights, He was revyld, disgrast, and foule abused; How scourgd, how crownd, how buffeted, how brused; And, lastly, how twixt robbers crucifyde, With bitter wounds through hands, through feet, and syde! Then let thy flinty hart, that feeles no paine, Empierced he with pittifull remorse, And let thy bowels bleede in every vaine, At sight of his most sacred heavenly corse, So torne and mangled with malicious forse; And let thy soule, whose sins his sorrows wrought, Melt into teares, and grone in grieved thought. With sence whereof whilest so thy softened spirit Is inly toucht, and humbled with meeke zeale Through meditation of his endlesse merit, Lift up thy mind to th'author of thy weale, And to his soveraine mercie doe appeale; Learne him to love that loved thee so deare, And in thy brest his blessed image beare. With all thy hart, with all thy soule and mind, Thou must him love, and his beheasts embrace; All other loves, with which the world doth blind Weake fancies, and stirre up affections base, Thou must renounce and utterly displace, And give thy self unto him full and free, That full and freely gave himselfe to thee. Then shalt thou feele thy spirit so possest, And ravisht with devouring great desire Of his dear selfe, that shall thy feeble brest Inflame with love, and set thee all on fire With burning zeale, through every part entire , That in no earthly thing thou shalt delight, But in his sweet and amiable sight. Thenceforth all worlds desire will in thee dye, And all earthes glorie, on which men do gaze, Seeme durt and drosse in thy pure-sighted eye, Compar'd to that celestiall beauties blaze, Whose glorious beames all fleshly sense doth daze With admiration of their passing light, Blinding the eyes, and lumining the spright. Then shall thy ravisht soul inspired bee With heavenly thoughts, farre above humane skil, And thy bright radiant eyes shall plainely see Th'idee of his pure glorie present still Before thy face, that all thy spirits shall fill With sweete enragement of celestiall love, Kindled through sight of those faire things above. Rapt with the rage of mine own ravisht thought, Through contemplation of those goodly sights And glorious images in heaven wrought, Whose wondrous beauty, breathing sweet delights, Do kindle love in high conceipted sprights, I faine to tell the things that I behold, But feele my wits to faile and tongue to fold. Vouchsafe then, O Thou most Almightie Spright! From whom all guifts of wit and knowledge flow, To shed into my breast some sparkling light Of thine eternall truth, that I may show Some little beames to mortall eyes below Of that immortall Beautie there with Thee, Which in my weake distraughted mynd I see; That with the glorie of so goodly sight The hearts of men, which fondly here admyre Faire seeming shewes, and feed on vaine delight, Transported with celestiall desyre Of those faire formes, may lift themselves up hyer, And learne to love, with zealous humble dewty, Th'Eternall Fountaine of that heavenly Beauty. Beginning then below, with th'easie vew Of this base world, subiect to fleshly eye, From thence to mount aloft, by order dew, To contemplation of th'immortall sky; Of the soare faulcon so I learne to flye. That flags a while her fluttering wings beneath, Till she her selfe for stronger flight can breath. Then looke, who list thy gazefull eyes to feed With sight of that is faire, looke on the frame Of this wyde universe, and therein reed The endlesse kinds of creatures which by name Thou canst not count, much less their natures aime; All which are made with wondrous wise respect, And all with admirable beautie deckt. First, th'Earth, on adamantine pillers founded Amid the Sea, engirt with brasen bands; Then th'Aire, still flitting, but yet firmely bounded On everie side with pyles of flaming brands, Never consum'd, nor quencht with mortall hands; And last, that mightie shining cristall wall, Wherewith he hath encompassed this all. By view whereof it plainly may appeare, That still as every thing doth upward tend And further is from earth, so still more cleare And faire it growes, till to his perfect end Of purest Beautie it at last ascend; Ayre more then water, fire much more then ayre, And heaven then fire, appeares more pure and fayre. Looke thou no further, but affixe thine eye On that bright shynie round still moving masse, The house of blessed God, which men call Skye, All sowd with glistring stars more thicke then grasse, Whereof each other doth in brightnesse passe, But those two most, which, ruling night and day, As king and queene the heavens empire sway; And tell me then, what hast thou ever seene That to their beautie may compared bee? Or can the sight that is most sharpe and keene Endure their captains flaming head to see? How much lesse those, much higher in degree, And so much fairer, and much more then these, As these are fairer then the land and seas? For farre above these heavens which here we see, Be others farre exceeding these in light, Not bounded, not corrupt, as these same bee, But infinite in largenesse and in hight, Unmoving, uncorrupt, and spotlesse bright, That need no sunne t'illuminate their spheres, But their owne native light farre passing theirs. And as these heavens still by degrees arize, Until they come to their first movers bound, That in his mightie compasse doth comprize And came all the rest with him around, So those likewise doe by degrees redound , And rise more faire, till they at last arive To the most faire, whereto they all do strive. Faire is the heaven where happy soules have place, In full enioyment of felicitie, Whence they doe still behold the glorious face More faire is that where those Idees on hie Enraunged be, which Plato so admyred, And pure Intelligences from God inspyred. Yet fairer is that heaven in which do raine The soveraigne Powres and mightie Potentates, Which in their high protections doe containe All mortall princes and imperiall states; And fayrer yet whereas the royall Seates And heavenly Dominations are set, From whom all earthly governance is fet . Yet farre more faire be those bright Cherubins, Which all with golden wings are overdight, And those eternall burning Seraphins, Which from their faces dart out fierie light; Yet fairer then they both, and much more bright, Be th'Angels and Archangels, which attend On Gods owne person, without rest or end. These thus in faire each other farre excelling, As to the Highest they approach more near, Yet is that Highest farre beyond all telling, Fairer then all the rest which there appeare, Though all their beauties ioyn'd together were; How then can mortall tongue hope to expresse The image of such endlesse perfectnesse? Cease then, my tongue! and lend unto my mynd Leave to bethinke how great that Beautie is, Whose utmost parts so beautifull I fynd; How much more those essentiall parts of His, His truth, his love, his wisedome, and his blis, His grace, his doome , his mercy, and his might, By which he lends us of himselfe a sight! Those unto all he daily doth display, And shew himselfe in th'image of his grace, As in a looking-glasse, through which he may Be seene of all his creatures vile and base, That are unable else to see his face; His glorious face! which glistereth else so bright, That th'angels selves can not endure his sight. But we, fraile wights! whose sight cannot sustaine The suns bright beames when he on us doth shyne, But that their points rebutted backe againe Are duld, how can we see with feeble eyne The glorie of that Maiestie Divine, In sight of whom both sun and moone are darke, Compared to his least resplendent sparke? The meanes, therefore, which unto us is lent Him to behold, is on his workes to looke. Which he hath made in beauty excellent, And in the same, as in a brasen booke, To read enregistred in every nooke His goodnesse, which his beautie doth declare; For all thats good is beautifull and faire. Thence gathering plumes of perfect speculation To impe the wings of thy high flying mynd, Mount up aloft through heavenly contemplation From this darke world, whose damps the soule do blynd, And, like the native brood of eagles kynd, On that bright Sunne of Glorie fixe thine eyes, Clear'd from grosse mists of fraile infirmities. Humbled with feare and awfull reverence, Before the footestoole of his Maiestie Throw thy selfe downe, with trembling innocence, Ne dare looke up with crruptible eye On the dred face of that great Deity, For feare lest, if he chaunce to look on thee, Thou turne to nought, and quite confounded be. But lowly fall before his mercie seate, Close covered with the Lambes integrity From the iust wrath of His avengefull threate That sits upon the righteous throne on hy; His throne is built upon Eternity, More firme and durable then steele or brasse, Or the hard diamond, which them both doth passe. His scepter is the rod of Righteousnesse, With which he bruseth all his foes to dust, And the great Dragon strongly doth represse Under the rigour of his iudgment iust; His seate is Truth, to which the faithfull trust, From whence proceed her beames so pure and bright, That all about him sheddeth glorious light: Light farre exceeding that bright blazing sparke Which darted is from Titans flaming head, That with his beames enlumineth the darke And dampish air, wherby al things are red ; Whose nature yet so much is marvelled Of mortall wits, that it doth much amaze The greatest wisards which thereon do gaze. But that immortall light which there doth shine Is many thousand times more bright, more cleare, More excellent, more glorious, more divine; Through which to God all mortall actions here, And even the thoughts of men, do plaine appeare; For from th'Eternall Truth it doth proceed, Through heavenly vertue which her beames doe breed. With the great glorie of that wondrous light His throne is all encompassed around, And hid in his owne brightnesse from the sight Of all that looke thereon with eyes unsound; And underneath his feet are to be found Thunder, and lightning, and tempestuous fyre, The instruments of his avenging yre. There in his bosome Sapience doth sit, The soveraine dearling of the Deity, Clad like a queene in royall robes, most fit For so great powre and peerelesse maiesty, And all with gemmes and iewels gorgeously Adornd, that brighter then the starres appeare, And make her native brightnes seem more cleare. And on her head a crown of purest gold Is set, in signe of highest soverainty; And in her hand a scepter she doth hold, With which she rules the house of God on hy, And menageth the ever-moving sky, And in the same these lower creatures all Subiected to her powre imperiall. Both heaven and earth obey unto her will, And all the creatures which they both containe; For of her fulnesse, which the world doth fill, They all partake, and do in state remaine As their great Maker did at first ordaine, Through observation of her high beheast, By which they first were made, and still increast. The fairnesse of her face no tongue can tell; For she the daughters of all wemens race, And angels eke, in beautie doth excell, Sparkled on her from Gods owne glorious face, And more increast by her owne goodly grace, That it doth farre exceed all humane thought, Ne can on earth compared be to ought. Ne could that painter had he lived yet Which pictured Venus with so curious quill That all posteritie admyred it, Have purtray'd this, for all his maistring skill; Ne she her selfe, had she remained still, And were as faire as fabling wits do fayne, Could once come neare this Beauty soverayne. But had those wits, the wonders of their dayes, Or that sweete Teian poet , which did spend His plenteous vaine in setting forth her praise, Seen but a glims of this which I pretend , How wondrously would he her face commend, Above that idole of his fayning thought, That all the world should with his rimes be fraught! How then dare I, the novice of his art, Presume to picture so divine a wight, Or hope t'expresse her least perfections part, Whose beautie filles the heavens with her light, And darkes the earth with shadow of her sight? Ah, gentle Muse! thou art too weake and faint The pourtraict of so heavenly hew to paint. Let angels, which her goodly face behold, And see at will, her soveraigne praises sing, And those most sacred mysteries unfold Of that faire love of mightie Heavens King; Enough is me t'admyre so heavenly thing, And being thus with her huge love possest, In th'only wonder of her selfe to rest. But whoso may, thrise happie man him hold Of all on earth, whom God so much doth grace, And lets his owne Beloved to behold; For in the view of her celestiall face All ioy, all blisse, all happinesse, have place; Ne ought on earth can want unto the wight Who of her selfe can win the wishfull sight. For she out of her secret threasury Plentie of riches forth on him will powre, Even heavenly riches, which there hidden ly Within the closet of her chastest bowre, Th'eternall portion of her precious dowre, Which Mighty God hath given to her free, And to all those which thereof worthy bee. None thereof worthy be, but those whom shee Vouchsafeth to her presence to receave, And letteth them her lovely face to see, Wherof such wondrous pleasures they conceave, And sweete contentment, that it doth bereave Their soul of sense, through infinite delight, And them transport from flesh into the spright. In which they see such admirable things, As carries them into an extasy; And heare such heavenly notes and carolings Of Gods high praise, that filles the brasen sky; And feele such ioy and pleasure inwardly, That maketh them all worldly cares forget, And onely thinke on that before them set. Ne from thenceforth doth any fleshly sense, Or idle thought of earthly things, remaine; But all that earst seemd sweet seemes now offence, And all that pleased earst now seemes to paine: Their ioy, their comfort, their desire, their game, Is fixed all on that which now they see; All other sights but fayned shadowes bee. And that faire lampe which useth to enflame The hearts of men with selfe-consuming fyre, Thenceforth seemes fowle, and full of sinfull blame And all that pompe to which proud minds aspyre By name of Honor, and so much desyre, Seemes to them basenesse, and all riches drosse, And all mirth sadnesse, and all lucre losse. So full their eyes are of that glorious sight, And senses fraught with such satietie. That in nought else on earth they can delight, But in th'aspect of that felicitie Which they have written in theyr inward ey; On which they feed, and in theyr fastened mynd All happie ioy and full contentment fynd. Ah, then, my hungry soule! which long hast fed On idle fancies of thy foolish thought, And, with false Beauties flattring bait misled, Hast after vaine deceiptfull shadowes sought, Which all are fled, and now have left thee nought But late repentance, through thy follies prief, Ah! ceasse to gaze on matter of thy grief: And looke at last up to that Soveraine Light, From whose pure beams al perfect Beauty springs, That kindleth love in every godly spright, Even the love of God; which loathing brings Of this vile world and these gay-seeming things; With whose sweet pleasures being so possest, Thy straying thoughts henceforth for ever rest. In youth, before I waxed old, The blynd boy, Venus baby, For want of cunning, made me bold In bitter hyve to grope for honny: But when he saw me stung and cry, He tooke his wings and away did fly. As Diane hunted on a day, She chaunst to come where Cupid lay, His quiver by his head: One of his shafts she stole away, And one of hers did close convay, Into the others stead: With that Love wounded my Loves hart, But Diane, beasts with Cupids dart. I saw, in secret to my dame How little Cupid humbly came, And said to her, All hayle, my mother! But when he saw me laugh, for shame His face with bashfull blood did flame, Not knowing Venus from the other. Then, never blush, Cupid, quoth I, For many have err'd in this beauty. Upon a day, as Love lay sweetly slumbring All in his mothers lap, A gentle Bee, with his loud trumpet murm'ring, About him flew by hap. Whereof when he was wakened with the noyse, And saw the beast so small, Whats this, quoth he, that gives so great a voyce, That wakens men withall? In angry wize he flies about, And threatens all with corage stout. To whom his mother, closely smiling, sayd, 'Twixt earnest and 'twixt game: See! thou thy selfe likewise art lyttle made, If thou regard the same. And yet thou suffrest neyther gods in sky, Nor men in earth, to rest: But when thou art disposed cruelly, Theyr sleepe thou doost molest. Then eyther change thy cruelty, Or give lyke leave unto the fly. Nathelesse, the cruell boy, not so content, Would needs the fly pursue, And in his hand, with heedlesse hardiment, Him caught for to subdue. But when on it he hasty hand did lay, The Bee him stung therefore. Now out, alas, he cryde, and welaway! I wounded am full sore. The fly, that I so much did scorne, Hath hurt me with his little horne. Unto his mother straight he weeping came, And of his griefe complayned; Who could not chuse but laugh at his fond game, Though sad to see him pained. Think now, quoth she, my son, how great the smart Of those whom thou dost wound: Full many thou hast pricked to the hart, That pitty never found. Therefore, henceforth some pitty take, When thou doest spoyle of lovers make. She tooke him streight full pitiously lamenting, She wrapt him softly, all the while repenting That he the fly did mock. She drest his wound, and it embaulmed well With salve of soveraigne might; And then she bath'd him in a dainty well, The well of deare delight. Who would not oft be stung as this, To be so bath'd in Venus blis? The wanton boy was shortly wel recured Of that his malady; But he soone after fresh again enured His former cruelty. And since that time he wounded hath my selfe With his sharpe dart of love, And now forgets the cruell carelesse elfe His mothers heast to prove. So now I languish, till he please My pining anguish to appease. Of this worldes stage, doest note with critique pen The sharpe dislikes of each condition: And, as one carelesse of suspition, Ne fawnest for the favour of the great, Ne fearest foolish reprehension Of faulty men, which daunger to thee threat: But freely doest of what thee list entreat,@ Like a great lord of peerelesse liberty, Lifting the good up to high Honours seat, And the evill damning evermore to dy: For life and death is in thy doomeful writing; So thy renowme lives ever by endighting. Dublin, this xviij. of July, . Your devoted friend, during life, Whoso wil seeke, by right deserts, t'attaine Unto the type of true nobility, And not by painted shewes, and titles vaine, Derived farre from famous auncestrie, Behold them both in their right visnomy Here truly pourtray'd as they ought to be, And striving both for termes of dignitie, To be advanced highest in degree. And when thou doost with equall insight see The ods twist both, of both then deem aright, And chuse the better of them both to thee; But thanks to him that it deserves behight@: To Nenna first, that first this worke created, And next to Iones, that truely it translated. Wherefore doth vaine Antiquitie so vaunt Her ancient monuments of mightie peeres, And old heres, which their world did daunt With their great deedes and fild their childrens eares? Who, rapt with wonder of their famous praise, Admire their statues, their colossoes great, Their rich triumphall arcks which they did raise, Their huge pyrmids, which do heaven threat. Lo! one, whom later age hath brought to light, Matchable to the greatest of those great; Great both by name, and great in power and might, And meriting a meere triumphant seate. The scourge of Turkes, and plague of infidels, Thy acts, O Scanderbeg, this volume tels. The antique Babel, empresse of the East, Upreard her buildinges to the threatned skie: And second Babell, tyrant of the West, Her ayry towers upraised much more high. But with the weight of their own surquedry They both are fallen, that all the earth did feare, And buried now in their own ashes ly, Yet shewing, by their heapes, how great they were. But in their place doth now a third appeare, Fayre Venice, flower of the last worlds delight; And next to them in beauty draweth neare, But farre exceedes in policie of right. Yet not so fayre her buildinges to behold As Lewkenors stile that hath her beautie told. Make thy selfe fluttring wings of thy fast flying Thought, and fly forth vnto my love whersoeuer she be: Whether lying reastlesse in heauy bedde, or else Sitting so cheerelesse at the cheerfull boorde, or else Playing alone carelesse on hir heauenlie virginals. If in bed, tell hir, that my eyes can take no reste; If at boorde, tell hir, that my mouth can eate no meate; If at hir virginals, tel hir, I can heare no mirth. Asked why? say, Waking loue suffereth no sleepe; Say, that raging loue dothe appall the weake stomacke; Say, that lamenting loue marreth the musicall. Tell hir, that hir pleasures were wonte to lull me asleepe; Tell hir, that hir beautie was wonte to feede mine eyes; Tell hir, that hir sweete tongue was wonte to make me mirth. Nowe doe I nightly waste, wanting my kindely reste; Nowe doe I dayly starue, wanting my liuely foode; Nowe doe I alwayes dye, wanting thy timely mirth. And if I waste, who will bewaile my heauy chaunce? And if I starue, who will record my cursed end? And if I dye, who will saye, This was Immerito? See yee the blindefolded pretie god, that feathered archer, Of louers miseries which maketh his bloodie game? Wote ye why his moother with a veale hath coouered his face? Trust me, least he my looue happely chaunce to beholde. That which I eate, did I ioy, and that which I greedily gorged; As for those many goodly matters leaft I for others. <|endofpoem|> We see Him come, and know Him ours, Who with His sunshine and His showers Turns all the patient ground to flowers. The quarterly stipend was paid through various booksellers, but I've more to bear my charge than way to go; But unto me be only hoarse, since now Heaven and my soul bear record of my vow I my desires screw from thee and direct Them and my thoughts to that sublime respect And conscience unto priesthood. 'Tis not need The scarecrow unto mankind that doth breed Wiser conclusions in me, since I know I've more to bear my charge than way to go; Or had I not, I'd stop the spreading itch Of craving more: so in conceit be rich; But 'tis the God of nature who intends And shapes my function for more glorious ends. Well may my book come forth like public day When such a light as you are leads the way, Who are my work's creator, and alone The flame of it, and the expansion. And look how all those heavenly lamps acquire Light from the sun, that inexhausted fire, So all my morn and evening stars from you Have their existence, and their influence too. Full is my book of glories; but all these By you become immortal substances. I sing of brooks, of blossoms, birds and bowers, Of April, May, of June and July-flowers; I sing of May-poles, hock-carts, wassails, wakes, Of bridegrooms, brides and of their bridal cakes; I write of youth, of love, and have access By these to sing of cleanly wantonness; I sing of dews, of rains, and piece by piece Of balm, of oil, of spice and ambergris; I sing of times trans-shifting, and I write How roses first came red and lilies white; I write of groves, of twilights, and I sing I write of hell; I sing and ever shall Of heaven, and hope to have it after all. Hock-cart , the last cart from the harvest-field. Whither, mad maiden, wilt thou roam? Far safer 'twere to stay at home, Where thou mayst sit and piping please The poor and private cottages, Since cotes and hamlets best agree With this thy meaner minstrelsy. There with the reed thou mayst express The shepherd's fleecy happiness, And with thy eclogues intermix Some smooth and harmless bucolics. There on a hillock thou mayst sing Unto a handsome shepherdling, Or to a girl, that keeps the neat, With breath more sweet than violet. There, there, perhaps, such lines as these May take the simple villages; But for the court, the country wit Is despicable unto it. Stay, then, at home, and do not go Or fly abroad to seek for woe. Contempts in courts and cities dwell, No critic haunts the poor man's cell, Where thou mayst hear thine own lines read By no one tongue there censured. That man's unwise will search for ill, And may prevent it, sitting still. While thou didst keep thy candour undefil'd, Dearly I lov'd thee as my first-born child, But when I saw thee wantonly to roam From house to house, and never stay at home, I brake my bonds of love, and bade thee go, Regardless whether well thou sped'st or no. On with thy fortunes then, whate'er they be: If good, I'll smile; if bad, I'll sigh for thee. To read my book the virgin shy May blush while Brutus standeth by, But when he's gone, read through what's writ, And never stain a cheek for it. Come thou not near those men who are like bread O'er-leaven'd, or like cheese o'er-renneted. In sober mornings, do not thou rehearse The holy incantation of a verse; But when that men have both well drunk and fed, Let my enchantments then be sung or read. When laurel spirts i'th' fire, and when the hearth Smiles to itself, and gilds the roof with mirth; When up the thyrse is rais'd, and when the sound Of sacred orgies flies, a round, a round. When the rose reigns, and locks with ointments shine, Let rigid Cato read these lines of mine. Droop, droop no more, or hang the head, Ye roses almost withered; Now strength and newer purple get, Each here declining violet. O primroses! let this day be A resurrection unto ye; And to all flowers ally'd in blood, Or sworn to that sweet sisterhood: For health on Julia's cheek hath shed Claret and cream commingled; And those her lips do now appear As beams of coral, but more clear. Let us, though late, at last, my Silvia, wed, And loving lie in one devoted bed. Thy watch may stand, my minutes fly post-haste; No sound calls back the year that once is past. Then, sweetest Silvia, let's no longer stay; True love, we know, precipitates delay. Away with doubts, all scruples hence remove; No man at one time can be wise and love. I dreamt the roses one time went To meet and sit in parliament; The place for these, and for the rest Of flowers, was thy spotless breast, Over the which a state was drawn Of tiffanie or cobweb lawn. Then in that parly all those powers Voted the rose the queen of flowers; But so as that herself should be The maid of honour unto thee. To get thine ends, lay bashfulness aside; Who fears to ask doth teach to be deny'd. I freeze, I freeze, and nothing dwells In me but snow and icicles. For pity's sake, give your advice, To melt this snow and thaw this ice. I'll drink down flames; but if so be Nothing but love can supple me, I'll rather keep this frost and snow Than to be thaw'd or heated so. Ah, my Perilla! dost thou grieve to see Me, day by day, to steal away from thee? Age calls me hence, and my grey hairs bid come, And haste away to mine eternal home; 'Twill not be long, Perilla, after this, That I must give thee the supremest kiss. Dead when I am, first cast in salt, and bring Part of the cream from that religious spring; With which, Perilla, wash my hands and feet; That done, then wind me in that very sheet Which wrapt thy smooth limbs when thou didst implore The gods' protection but the night before. Follow me weeping to my turf, and there Let fall a primrose, and with it a tear: Then, lastly, let some weekly-strewings be Devoted to the memory of me: Then shall my ghost not walk about, but keep Still in the cool and silent shades of sleep. Come down and dance ye in the toil Of pleasures to a heat; But if to moisture, let the oil Of roses be your sweat. Not only to yourselves assume These sweets, but let them fly From this to that, and so perfume E'en all the standers by; As goddess Isis, when she went Or glided through the street, Made all that touched her, with her scent, And whom she touched, turn sweet. When I thy parts run o'er, I can't espy In any one the least indecency; But every line and limb diffused thence A fair and unfamiliar excellence: So that the more I look the more I prove There's still more cause why I the more should love. The seeds of treason choke up as they spring: Two of a thousand things are disallow'd: A lying rich man, and a poor man proud. Help me! help me! now I call To my pretty witchcrafts all; Old I am, and cannot do That I was accustomed to. Bring your magics, spells, and charms, To enflesh my thighs and arms. Is there no way to beget In my limbs their former heat? son had, as poets feign, Baths that made him young again: Find that medicine, if you can, For your dry decrepit man Who would fain his strength renew, Were it but to pleasure you. Come bring your sampler, and with art Draw in't a wounded heart And dropping here and there: Not that I think that any dart Can make yours bleed a tear, Or pierce it anywhere; Yet do it to this end: that I May by This secret see, Though you can make That heart to bleed, yours ne'er will ache For me. What I fancy I approve, No dislike there is in love . Be my mistress short or tall, And distorted therewithal: Be she likewise one of those That an acre hath of nose: Be her forehead and her eyes Full of incongruities: Be her cheeks so shallow too As to show her tongue wag through; Be her lips ill hung or set, And her grinders black as jet: Has she thin hair, hath she none, She's to me a paragon. If, dear Anthea, my hard fate it be To live some few sad hours after thee, Thy sacred corse with odours I will burn, And with my laurel crown thy golden urn. Then holding up there such religious things As were, time past, thy holy filletings, Near to thy reverend pitcher I will fall Down dead for grief, and end my woes withal: So three in one small plat of ground shall lie Anthea, Herrick, and his poetry. I saw a cherry weep, and why? Why wept it? but for shame Because my Julia's lip was by, And did out-red the same. But, pretty fondling, let not fall A tear at all for that: Which rubies, corals, scarlets, all For tincture wonder at. The mellow touch of music most doth wound The soul when it doth rather sigh than sound. 'Twixt kings and subjects there's this mighty odds: Subjects are taught by men; kings by the gods. Some would know Why I so Long still do tarry, And ask why Here that I Live and not marry. Thus I those Do oppose: What man would be here Slave to thrall, If at all He could live free here? Julia was careless, and withal She rather took than got a fall, The wanton ambler chanc'd to see Part of her legs' sincerity: And ravish'd thus, it came to pass, The nag like to the prophet's ass Began to speak, and would have been A-telling what rare sights he'd seen: And had told all; but did refrain Because his tongue was tied again. Live with a thrifty, not a needy fate; Small shots paid often waste a vast estate . Love is a circle that doth restless move In the same sweet eternity of love. When what is lov'd is present, love doth spring; But being absent, love lies languishing. A bachelor I will Live as I have liv'd still, And never take a wife To crucify my life; But this I'll tell ye too, What now I mean to do: A sister in the stead Of wife about I'll lead; Which I will keep embrac'd, And kiss, but yet be chaste. To me my Julia lately sent A bracelet richly redolent: The beads I kissed, but most lov'd her That did perfume the pomander. Anthea bade me tie her shoe; I did; and kissed the instep too: And would have kissed unto her knee, Had not her blush rebuked me. Instead of orient pearls of jet I sent my love a carcanet; About her spotless neck she knit The lace, to honour me or it: Then think how rapt was I to see My jet t'enthral such ivory. When that day comes, whose evening says I'm gone Unto that watery desolation, Devoutly to thy closet-gods then pray That my wing'd ship may meet no remora. Those deities which circum-walk the seas, And look upon our dreadful passages, Will from all dangers re-deliver me For one drink-offering poured out by thee. Mercy and truth live with thee! and forbear In my short absence to unsluice a tear; But yet for love's sake let thy lips do this, Give my dead picture one engendering kiss: Work that to life, and let me ever dwell In thy remembrance, Julia. So farewell. Why this flower is now call'd so, List, sweet maids, and you shall know. Understand, this firstling was Once a brisk and bonnie lass, Kept as close as Dana was: Who a sprightly springall lov'd, And to have it fully prov'd, Up she got upon a wall, Tempting down to slide withal: But the silken twist untied, So she fell, and, bruis'd, she died. Love, in pity of the deed, And her loving-luckless speed, Turn'd her to this plant we call Now the flower of the wall . These fresh beauties we can prove Once were virgins sick of love. Turn'd to flowers, still in some Colours go and colours come. You say I love not, 'cause I do not play Still with your curls, and kiss the time away. You blame me too, because I can't devise Some sport to please those babies in your eyes: By love's religion, I must here confess it, The most I love when I the least express it. Small griefs find tongues : full casks are ever found To give if any, yet but little sound. Deep waters noiseless are ; and this we know, That chiding streams betray small depth below . So, when love speechless is, she doth express A depth in love and that depth bottomless. Now, since my love is tongueless, know me such Who speak but little 'cause I love so much. I have lost, and lately, these Many dainty mistresses: Stately Julia, prime of all: Sappho next, a principal: Smooth Anthea for a skin White, and heaven-like crystalline: Sweet Electra, and the choice Myrrha for the lute and voice: Next Corinna, for her wit, And the graceful use of it: With Perilla: all are gone; Only Herrick's left alone For to number sorrow by Their departures hence, and die. Methought last night Love in an anger came And brought a rod, so whipt me with the same; Myrtle the twigs were, merely to imply Love strikes, but 'tis with gentle cruelty. Patient I was: Love pitiful grew then And strok'd the stripes, and I was whole again. Thus, like a bee, Love gentle still doth bring Honey to salve where he before did sting. I'm free from thee; and thou no more shalt hear My puling pipe to beat against thine ear. Farewell my shackles, though of pearl they be; Such precious thraldom ne'er shall fetter me. He loves his bonds who, when the first are broke, Submits his neck unto a second yoke. Young I was, but now am old, But I am not yet grown cold; I can play, and I can twine 'Bout a virgin like a vine: In her lap too I can lie Melting, and in fancy die; And return to life if she Claps my cheek, or kisseth me: Thus, and thus it now appears That our love outlasts our years. Love and myself, believe me, on a day At childish push-pin, for our sport, did play; I put, he pushed, and, heedless of my skin, Love pricked my finger with a golden pin; Since which it festers so that I can prove 'Twas but a trick to poison me with love: Little the wound was, greater was the smart, The finger bled, but burnt was all my heart. One ask'd me where the roses grew: I bade him not go seek, But forthwith bade my Julia show A bud in either cheek. Old wives have often told how they Saw Cupid bitten by a flea; And thereupon, in tears half drown'd, He cried aloud: Help, help the wound! He wept, he sobb'd, he call'd to some To bring him lint and balsamum, To make a tent, and put it in Where the stiletto pierced the skin; Which, being done, the fretful pain Assuaged, and he was well again. Three lovely sisters working were, As they were closely set, Of soft and dainty maidenhair A curious armillet. I, smiling, asked them what they did, Fair Destinies all three, Who told me they had drawn a thread Of life, and 'twas for me. They show'd me then how fine 'twas spun, And I reply'd thereto, I care not now how soon 'tis done, Or cut, if cut by you. When one is past, another care we have: Thus woe succeeds a woe, as wave a wave . Julia and I did lately sit Playing for sport at cherry-pit: She threw; I cast; and, having thrown, I got the pit, and she the stone. Laid out for dead, let thy last kindness be With leaves and moss-work for to cover me: And while the wood-nymphs my cold corpse inter, Sing thou my dirge, sweet-warbling chorister! For epitaph, in foliage, next write this: Here, here the tomb of Robin Herrick is . More discontents I never had Since I was born than here, Where I have been, and still am sad, In this dull Devonshire; Yet, justly too, I must confess I ne'er invented such Ennobled numbers for the press, Than where I loathed so much. O earth! earth! earth! hear thou my voice, and be Loving and gentle for to cover me: Banish'd from thee I live, ne'er to return, Unless thou giv'st my small remains an urn. Cherry-ripe, ripe, ripe, I cry, Full and fair ones; come and buy. If so be you ask me where They do grow, I answer: There, Where my Julia's lips do smile; There's the land, or cherry-isle, Whose plantations fully show All the year where cherries grow. Put on your silks, and piece by piece Give them the scent of ambergris; And for your breaths, too, let them smell Ambrosia-like, or nectarel; While other gums their sweets perspire, Now is the time, when all the lights wax dim; And thou, Anthea, must withdraw from him Who was thy servant. Dearest, bury me Under that Holy-oak or Gospel-tree, Where, though thou see'st not, thou may'st think upon Me, when thou yearly go'st procession; Or, for mine honour, lay me in that tomb In which thy sacred relics shall have room. For my embalming, sweetest, there will be No spices wanting when I'm laid by thee. I dreamed we both were in a bed Of roses, almost smothered: The warmth and sweetness had me there Made lovingly familiar, But that I heard thy sweet breath say, Faults done by night will blush by day. I kissed thee, panting, and, I call Night to the record! that was all. But, ah! if empty dreams so please, Love give me more such nights as these. Here we are all by day; by night we're hurl'd By dreams, each one into a sev'ral world. In man ambition is the common'st thing; Each one by nature loves to be a king. Julia, if I chance to die Ere I print my poetry, I most humbly thee desire To commit it to the fire: Better 'twere my book were dead Than to live not perfected. Fight thou with shafts of silver and o'ercome, When no force else can get the masterdom. Water, water I desire, Here's a house of flesh on fire; Ope the fountains and the springs, And come all to bucketings: What ye cannot quench pull down; Spoil a house to save a town: Better 'tis that one should fall, Than by one to hazard all. When some shall say, Fair once my Silvia was, Thou wilt complain, False now's thy looking-glass, Which renders that quite tarnished which was green, And priceless now what peerless once had been. Upon thy form more wrinkles yet will fall, And, coming down, shall make no noise at all. 'Tis not a thousand bullocks' thighs Can please those heav'nly deities, If the vower don't express In his offering cheerfulness. 'Tis not greatness they require To be offer'd up by fire; But 'tis sweetness that doth please If meat the gods give, I the steam High-towering will devote to them, Whose easy natures like it well, If we the roast have, they the smell. So smooth, so sweet, so silv'ry is thy voice, As, could they hear, the damn'd would make no noise, But listen to thee, walking in thy chamber, Melting melodious words to lutes of amber. When I thy singing next shall hear, I'll wish I might turn all to ear To drink in notes and numbers such As blessed souls can't hear too much; Then melted down, there let me lie Entranc'd and lost confusedly, And, by thy music stricken mute, Die and be turn'd into a lute. The growth and downfall of her aged trees; That timber tall, which threescore lusters stood The proud dictator of the state-like wood, I mean the sovereign of all plants the oak Droops, dies, and falls without the cleaver's stroke. First, April, she with mellow showers Opens the way for early flowers; Then after her comes smiling May, In a more rich and sweet array; Next enters June, and brings us more Gems than those two that went before: Then lastly July comes, and she More wealth brings in than all those three. Thou sail'st with others in this Argus here; Nor wreck or bulging thou hast cause to fear; But trust to this, my noble passenger; Who swims with virtue, he shall still be sure Ulysses-like all tempests to endure, And 'midst a thousand gulfs to be secure. First, for effusions due unto the dead, My solemn vows have here accomplished: Next, how I love thee, that my grief must tell, Wherein thou liv'st for ever. Dear, farewell. How love came in I do not know, Whether by the eye, or ear, or no; Or whether with the soul it came At first infused with the same; Whether in part 'tis here or there, Or, like the soul, whole everywhere, This troubles me: but I as well As any other this can tell: That when from hence she does depart The outlet then is from the heart. Ah, my Anthea! Must my heart still break? Love makes me write, what shame forbids to speak . Give me a kiss, and to that kiss a score; Then to that twenty add a hundred more: A thousand to that hundred: so kiss on, To make that thousand up a million. Treble that million, and when that is done Let's kiss afresh, as when we first begun. But yet, though love likes well such scenes as these, There is an act that will more fully please: Kissing and glancing, soothing, all make way But to the acting of this private play: Name it I would; but, being blushing red, The rest I'll speak when we meet both in bed. Some ask'd me where the rubies grew, And nothing I did say: But with my finger pointed to The lips of Julia. Some ask'd how pearls did grow, and where; Then spoke I to my girl, To part her lips, and show'd them there The quarrelets of Pearl. Conformity was ever known A foe to dissolution: Nor can we that a ruin call, Whose crack gives crushing unto all. Welcome, most welcome to our vows and us, Most great and universal genius! The drooping West, which hitherto has stood As one in long-lamented widowhood, Looks like a bride now, or a bed of flowers Newly refresh'd both by the sun and showers. War, which before was horrid, now appears Lovely in you, brave prince of cavaliers! A deal of courage in each bosom springs By your access, O you the best of kings! Ride on with all white omens; so that where Your standard's up, we fix a conquest there. Under a lawn, than skies more clear, Some ruffled roses nestling were: And, snugging there, they seem'd to lie As in a flowery nunnery: They blush'd, and look'd more fresh than flowers Quicken'd of late by pearly showers, And all because they were possess'd But of the heat of Julia's breast: Which, as a warm and moisten'd spring, Gave them their ever-flourishing. Woe, woe to them, who, by a ball of strife, Do, and have parted here a man and wife: CHARLES the best husband, while MARIA strives To be, and is, the very best of wives, Like streams, you are divorc'd; but 'twill come when These eyes of mine shall see you mix again. Thus speaks the oak here; C. and M. shall meet, Treading on amber, with their silver-feet, Nor will't be long ere this accomplish'd be: The words found true, C. M., remember me. As oft as night is banish'd by the morn, So oft we'll think we see a king new born. One silent night of late, When every creature rested, Came one unto my gate And, knocking, me molested. Who's that, said I, beats there, And troubles thus the sleepy? Cast off, said he, all fear, And let not locks thus keep ye. For I a boy am, who By moonless nights have swerved; And all with show'rs wet through, And e'en with cold half starved. I pitiful arose, And soon a taper lighted; And did myself disclose Unto the lad benighted. I saw he had a bow And wings, too, which did shiver; And, looking down below, I spied he had a quiver. I to my chimney's shine Brought him, as Love professes, And chafed his hands with mine, And dried his drooping tresses. But when he felt him warm'd: Let's try this bow of ours, And string, if they be harm'd, Said he, with these late showers. Forthwith his bow he bent, And wedded string and arrow, And struck me, that it went Quite through my heart and marrow. Then, laughing loud, he flew Away, and thus said, flying: Adieu, mine host, adieu, I'll leave thy heart a-dying. That for seven lusters I did never come To do the rites to thy religious tomb; That neither hair was cut, or true tears shed By me, o'er thee, as justments to the dead, Forgive, forgive me; since I did not know Whether thy bones had here their rest or no, But now 'tis known, behold! behold, I bring Unto thy ghost th' effused offering: And look what smallage, night-shade, cypress, yew, Unto the shades have been, or now are due, Here I devote; and something more than so; I come to pay a debt of birth I owe. Thou gav'st me life, but mortal; for that one Favour I'll make full satisfaction; For my life mortal rise from out thy hearse. And take a life immortal from my verse. A sweet disorder in the dress Kindles in clothes a wantonness: A lawn about the shoulders thrown Into a fine distraction: An erring lace which here and there Enthralls the crimson stomacher: A cuff neglectful, and thereby Ribbons to flow confusedly: A winning wave, deserving note, In the tempestuous petticoat: A careless shoe-string, in whose tie I see a wild civility: Do more bewitch me than when art Is too precise in every part. Were I to give thee baptism, I would choose To christen thee, the bride, the bashful Muse, Or Muse of roses: since that name does fit Best with those virgin-verses thou hast writ: Which are so clean, so chaste, as none may fear Cato the censor, should he scan each here. Love scorch'd my finger, but did spare The burning of my heart; To signify in love my share Should be a little part. Little I love; but if that he Would but that heat recall; That joint to ashes burnt should be, Ere I would love at all. Dean Bourn, farewell; I never look to see Dean, or thy watery incivility. Thy rocky bottom, that doth tear thy streams And makes them frantic even to all extremes, To my content I never should behold, Were thy streams silver, or thy rocks all gold. Rocky thou art, and rocky we discover Thy men, and rocky are thy ways all over. O men, O manners, now and ever known To be a rocky generation! A people currish, churlish as the seas, And rude almost as rudest savages, With whom I did, and may re-sojourn when Rocks turn to rivers, rivers turn to men. Me pay the debt I owe thee for a kiss Thou lend'st to me, And I to thee Will render ten for this. If thou wilt say Ten will not pay For that so rich a one; I'll clear the sum, If it will come Unto a million. By this, I guess, Of happiness Who has a little measure, He must of right To th' utmost mite Make payment for his pleasure. How rich and pleasing thou, my Julia, art In each thy dainty and peculiar part! First, for thy queenship, on thy head is set Of flowers a sweet commingled coronet: About thy neck a carcanet is bound, Made of the ruby, pearl and diamond: A golden ring that shines upon thy thumb: About thy wrist, the rich dardanium. Between thy breasts than down of swans more white There plays the sapphire with the chrysolite. No part besides must of thyself be known, But by the topaz, opal, chalcedon. A funeral stone Or verse I covet none, But only crave Of you that I may have A sacred laurel springing from my grave: Which being seen, Blest with perpetual green, May grow to be Not so much call'd a tree As the eternal monument of me. Give me that man that dares bestride The active sea-horse, and with pride Through that huge field of waters ride. Who with his looks, too, can appease The ruffling winds and raging seas, In midst of all their outrages. This, this a virtuous man can do, Sail against rocks, and split them too; Ay, and a world of pikes pass through. I'll do my best to win whene'er I woo: That man loves not who is not zealous too . About the sweet bag of a bee Two cupids fell at odds, And whose the pretty prize should be They vow'd to ask the gods. Which Venus hearing, thither came, And for their boldness stripp'd them, And, taking thence from each his flame, With rods of myrtle whipp'd them. Which done, to still their wanton cries, When quiet grown she'd seen them, She kiss'd, and wip'd their dove-like eyes, And gave the bag between them. Let me be warm, let me be fully fed, Let me be lean, and cold, and once grown poor, I shall dislike what once I lov'd before. Choose me your valentine, Next let us marry Love to the death will pine If we long tarry. Promise, and keep your vows, Or vow ye never Love's doctrine disallows Troth-breakers ever. You have broke promise twice, Dear, to undo me, If you prove faithless thrice None then will woo ye. See and not see, and if thou chance t'espy Some aberrations in my poetry, Wink at small faults; the greater, ne'ertheless, Hide, and with them their father's nakedness. Let's do our best, our watch and ward to keep; Homer himself, in a long work, may sleep. I'll write, because I'll give You critics means to live; For should I not supply The cause, th' effect would die. Good princes must be pray'd for; for the bad They must be borne with, and in rev'rence had. Do they first pill thee, next pluck off thy skin? Good children kiss the rods that punish sin . Touch not the tyrant; let the gods alone To strike him dead that but usurps a throne. When age or chance has made me blind, So that the path I cannot find, And when my falls and stumblings are More than the stones i' th' street by far, Go thou afore, and I shall well Follow thy perfumes by the smell; Or be my guide, and I shall be Led by some light that flows from thee. Thus held or led by thee, I shall In ways confus'd nor slip or fall. To bread and water none is poor; And having these, what need of more? Though much from out the cess be spent, We two are last in hell; what may we fear To be tormented or kept pris'ners here? Alas! if kissing be of plagues the worst, We'll wish in hell we had been last and first. Beauty no other thing is than a beam Flashed out between the middle and extreme. Dear, though to part it be a hell, Yet, Dianeme, now farewell: Thy frown last night did bid me go, But whither only grief does know. I do beseech thee ere we part, If merciful as fair thou art, Or else desir'st that maids should tell Thy pity by love's chronicle, O Dianeme, rather kill Me, than to make me languish still! 'Tis cruelty in thee to th' height Thus, thus to wound, not kill outright; Yet there's a way found, if you please, By sudden death to give me ease; And thus devis'd, do thou but this Bequeath to me one parting kiss, So sup'rabundant joy shall be The executioner of me. So looks Anthea, when in bed she lies O'ercome or half betray'd by tiffanies, Like to a twilight, or that simpering dawn That roses show when misted o'er with lawn. Twilight is yet, till that her lawns give way; Which done, that dawn turns then to perfect day. More white than whitest lilies far, Or snow, or whitest swans you are: More white than are the whitest creams, Or moonlight tinselling the streams: More white than pearls, or Juno's thigh, Or Pelops' arm of ivory. True, I confess, such whites as these May me delight, not fully please; Till like Ixion's cloud you be White, warm, and soft to lie with me. Thrice, and above, bless'd, my soul's half, art thou In thy both last and better vow: Could'st leave the city, for exchange, to see The country's sweet simplicity: And it to know and practise, with intent To grow the sooner innocent By studying to know virtue, and to aim More at her nature than her name. The last is but the least; the first doth tell Ways less to live than to live well: And both are known to thee, who now can'st live Led by thy conscience; to give Justice to soon-pleased nature; and to show Wisdom and she together go And keep one centre: this with that conspires To teach man to confine desires And know that riches have their proper stint In the contented mind, not mint: And can'st instruct that those who have the itch Of craving more are never rich. These things thou know'st to th' height, and dost prevent That plague; because thou art content With that heav'n gave thee with a wary hand, More blessed in thy brass than land, To keep cheap nature even and upright; To cool, not cocker appetite. Thus thou canst tersely live to satisfy The belly chiefly, not the eye; Keeping the barking stomach wisely quiet, Less with a neat than needful diet. But that which most makes sweet thy country life Is the fruition of a wife: Whom, stars consenting with thy fate, thou hast Got not so beautiful as chaste: By whose warm side thou dost securely sleep, While love the sentinel doth keep, With those deeds done by day, which ne'er affright Thy silken slumbers in the night. Nor has the darkness power to usher in Fear to those sheets that know no sin; But still thy wife, by chaste intentions led, Gives thee each night a maidenhead. The damask'd meadows and the pebbly streams Sweeten and make soft your dreams: The purling springs, groves, birds, and well-weav'd bowers, With fields enamelled with flowers, Present their shapes; while fantasy discloses Millions of lilies mix'd with roses. Then dream ye hear the lamb by many a bleat Woo'd to come suck the milky teat: While Faunus in the vision comes to keep From rav'ning wolves the fleecy sheep. With thousand such enchanting dreams, that meet To make sleep not so sound as sweet: Nor can these figures so thy rest endear As not to rise when Chanticlere Warns the last watch; but with the dawn dost rise To work, but first to sacrifice; Making thy peace with heav'n, for some late fault, With holy-meal and spirting-salt. Which done, thy painful thumb this sentence tells us, Jove for our labour all things sells us . Nor are thy daily and devout affairs Attended with those desp'rate cares Th' industrious merchant has; who, for to find Gold, runneth to the Western Inde, And back again, tortured with fears, doth fly, Untaught to suffer poverty. But thou at home, bless'd with securest ease, Sitt'st, and believ'st that there be seas And watery dangers; while thy whiter hap But sees these things within thy map. And viewing them with a more safe survey Mak'st easy fear unto thee say, A heart thrice wall'd with oak and brass that man Had, first durst plough the ocean . But thou at home, without or tide or gale, Can'st in thy map securely sail: Seeing those painted countries, and so guess By those fine shades their substances: And, from thy compass taking small advice, Buy'st travel at the lowest price. Nor are thine ears so deaf but thou canst hear, Far more with wonder than with fear, Fame tell of states, of countries, courts, and kings, And believe there be such things: When of these truths thy happier knowledge lies More in thine ears than in thine eyes. And when thou hear'st by that too true report Vice rules the most or all at court, Thy pious wishes are, though thou not there, Virtue had, and mov'd her sphere. But thou liv'st fearless; and thy face ne'er shows Fortune when she comes or goes, But with thy equal thoughts prepared dost stand, To take her by the either hand; Nor car'st which comes the first, the foul or fair: A wise man ev'ry way lies square , And, like a surly oak with storms perplex'd, Grows still the stronger, strongly vex'd. Be so, bold spirit; stand centre-like, unmov'd; And be not only thought, but prov'd To be what I report thee; and inure Thyself, if want comes to endure: And so thou dost, for thy desires are Confin'd to live with private lar: Not curious whether appetite be fed Or with the first or second bread, Who keep'st no proud mouth for delicious cates: Hunger makes coarse meats delicates. Canst, and unurg'd, forsake that larded fare, Which art, not nature, makes so rare, To taste boil'd nettles, colworts, beets, and eat These and sour herbs as dainty meat, While soft opinion makes thy Genius say, Content makes all ambrosia . Nor is it that thou keep'st this stricter size So much for want as exercise: To numb the sense of dearth, which should sin haste it, Thou might'st but only see't, not taste it. Yet can thy humble roof maintain a choir Of singing crickets by the fire: And the brisk mouse may feast herself with crumbs Till that the green-eyed kitling comes, Then to her cabin blest she can escape The sudden danger of a rape: And thus thy little well-kept stock doth prove Wealth cannot make a life, but love . Nor art thou so close-handed but canst spend, Counsel concurring with the end, As well as spare, still conning o'er this theme, To shun the first and last extreme. Ordaining that thy small stock find no breach, Or to exceed thy tether's reach: But to live round, and close, and wisely true To thine own self, and known to few. Thus let thy rural sanctuary be Elysium to thy wife and thee; There to disport yourselves with golden measure: For seldom use commends the pleasure . Live, and live blest, thrice happy pair; let breath, But lost to one, be the other's death. And as there is one love, one faith, one troth, Be so one death, one grave to both. Till when, in such assurance live ye may, Nor fear or wish your dying day. When a daffodil I see, Hanging down his head towards me, Guess I may what I must be: First, I shall decline my head; Secondly, I shall be dead; Lastly, safely buried. Come, skilful Lupo, now, and take Thy bice, thy umber, pink, and lake; And let it be thy pencil's strife, To paint a Bridgeman to the life: Draw him as like too, as you can, An old, poor, lying, flattering man: His cheeks bepimpled, red and blue; His nose and lips of mulberry hue. Then, for an easy fancy, place A burling iron for his face: Next, make his cheeks with breath to swell, And for to speak, if possible: But do not so, for fear lest he Should by his breathing, poison thee. While the milder fates consent, Let's enjoy our merriment: Drink, and dance, and pipe, and play; Kiss our dollies night and day: Crowned with clusters of the vine, Let us sit, and quaff our wine. Call on Bacchus, chant his praise; Shake the thyrse, and bite the bays: Rouse Anacreon from the dead, And return him drunk to bed: Sing o'er Horace, for ere long Death will come and mar the song: Then shall Wilson and Gotiere Never sing or play more here. When my date's done, and my grey age must die, Nurse up, great lord, this my posterity: Weak though it be, long may it grow and stand, Shored up by you, brave Earl of Westmoreland. Whene'er my heart love's warmth but entertains, Oh frost! oh snow! oh hail! forbid the banes. One drop now deads a spark, but if the same Once gets a force, floods cannot quench the flame. Rather than love, let me be ever lost, Or let me 'gender with eternal frost. As shows the air when with a rainbow grac'd, So smiles that riband 'bout my Julia's waist: Or like nay 'tis that zonulet of love, Wherein all pleasures of the world are wove. Whither? say, whither shall I fly, To slack these flames wherein I fry? To the treasures, shall I go, Of the rain, frost, hail, and snow? Shall I search the underground, Where all damps and mists are found? Shall I seek for speedy ease All the floods and frozen seas? Or descend into the deep, Where eternal cold does keep? These may cool; but there's a zone Colder yet than anyone: That's my Julia's breast, where dwells Such destructive icicles, As that the congelation will Me sooner starve than those can kill. With blameless carriage, I lived here To the almost seven and fortieth year. Stout sons I had, and those twice three One only daughter lent to me: The which was made a happy bride But thrice three moons before she died. My modest wedlock, that was known Contented with the bed of one. Let there be patrons, patrons like to thee, Brave Porter! poets ne'er will wanting be: Fabius and Cotta, Lentulus, all live In thee, thou man of men! who here do'st give Not only subject-matter for our wit, But likewise oil of maintenance to it: For which, before thy threshold, we'll lay down Our thyrse for sceptre, and our bays for crown. For, to say truth, all garlands are thy due: The laurel, myrtle, oak, and ivy too. Lilies will languish; violets look ill; Sickly the primrose; pale the daffodil; That gallant tulip will hang down his head, Like to a virgin newly ravished; Pansies will weep, and marigolds will wither, And keep a fast and funeral together; Sappho droop, daisies will open never, But bid good-night, and close their lids for ever. When as Leander young was drown'd No heart by Love receiv'd a wound, But on a rock himself sat by, There weeping sup'rabundantly. Sighs numberless he cast about, And, all his tapers thus put out, His head upon his hand he laid, And sobbing deeply, thus he said: Ah, cruel sea, and, looking on't, Wept as he'd drown the Hellespont. And sure his tongue had more express'd But that his tears forbade the rest. None goes to warfare but with this intent The gains must dead the fears of detriment. Health is the first good lent to men; A gentle disposition then: Next, to be rich by no by-ways; Lastly, with friends t'enjoy our days. When I did go from thee I felt that smart Which bodies do when souls from them depart. Thou did'st not mind it; though thou then might'st see Me turn'd to tears; yet did'st not weep for me. 'Tis true, I kiss'd thee; but I could not hear Thee spend a sigh t'accompany my tear. Methought 'twas strange that thou so hard should'st prove, Whose heart, whose hand, whose every part spake love. Prithee, lest maids should censure thee, but say Thou shed'st one tear, whenas I went away; And that will please me somewhat: though I know, And Love will swear't, my dearest did not so. Glide, gentle streams, and bear Along with you my tear To that coy girl Who smiles, yet slays Me with delays, And strings my tears as pearl. See! see, she's yonder set, Making a carcanet Of maiden-flowers! There, there present This orient And pendant pearl of ours. Then say I've sent one more Gem to enrich her store; And that is all Which I can send, Or vainly spend, For tears no more will fall. Nor will I seek supply Of them, the spring's once dry; But I'll devise, Among the rest, A way that's best How I may save mine eyes. Yet say should she condemn Me to surrender them Then say my part Must be to weep Out them, to keep A poor, yet loving heart. Say too, she would have this; She shall: then my hope is, That when I'm poor And nothing have To send or save, I'm sure she'll ask no more. What times of sweetness this fair day foreshows, Whenas the Lily marries with the Rose! What next is look'd for? but we all should see To spring from thee a sweet posterity. Virgins promis'd when I died That they would each primrose-tide Duly, morn and evening, come, And with flowers dress my tomb. Having promis'd, pay your debts, Maids, and here strew violets. That hour-glass which there you see With water fill'd, sirs, credit me, The humour was, as I have read, But lovers' tears incrystalled. Which, as they drop by drop do pass From th' upper to the under-glass, Do in a trickling manner tell, By many a watery syllable, That lovers' tears in lifetime shed Do restless run when they are dead. Farewell thou thing, time past so known, so dear To me as blood to life and spirit; near, Nay, thou more near than kindred, friend, man, wife, Male to the female, soul to body; life To quick action, or the warm soft side Of the resigning, yet resisting bride. The kiss of virgins, first fruits of the bed, Soft speech, smooth touch, the lips, the maidenhead: These and a thousand sweets could never be So near or dear as thou wast once to me. O thou, the drink of gods and angels! wine That scatter'st spirit and lust, whose purest shine More radiant than the summer's sunbeams shows; Each way illustrious, brave, and like to those Comets we see by night, whose shagg'd portents Foretell the coming of some dire events, Or some full flame which with a pride aspires, Throwing about his wild and active fires; 'Tis thou, above nectar, O divinest soul! Eternal in thyself, that can'st control That which subverts whole nature, grief and care, Vexation of the mind, and damn'd despair. 'Tis thou alone who, with thy mystic fan, Work'st more than wisdom, art, or nature can To rouse the sacred madness and awake The frost-bound blood and spirits, and to make Them frantic with thy raptures flashing through The soul like lightning, and as active too. 'Tis not Apollo can, or those thrice three Castalian sisters, sing, if wanting thee. Horace, Anacreon, both had lost their fame, Had'st thou not fill'd them with thy fire and flame. Phbean splendour! and thou, Thespian spring! Of which sweet swans must drink before they sing Their true-pac'd numbers and their holy lays, Which makes them worthy cedar and the bays. But why, why longer do I gaze upon Thee with the eye of admiration? Since I must leave thee, and enforc'd must say To all thy witching beauties, Go, away. But if thy whimpering looks do ask me why, Then know that nature bids thee go, not I. 'Tis her erroneous self has made a brain Uncapable of such a sovereign As is thy powerful self. Prithee not smile, Or smile more inly, lest thy looks beguile My vows denounc'd in zeal, which thus much show thee That I have sworn but by thy looks to know thee. Let others drink thee freely, and desire Thee and their lips espous'd, while I admire And love thee, but not taste thee. Let my muse Fail of thy former helps, and only use Her inadult'rate strength: what's done by me Hereafter shall smell of the lamp, not thee. Sweet Amarillis by a spring's Soft and soul-melting murmurings Slept, and thus sleeping, thither flew A robin-redbreast, who, at view, Not seeing her at all to stir, Brought leaves and moss to cover her; But while he perking there did pry About the arch of either eye, The lid began to let out day, At which poor robin flew away, And seeing her not dead, but all disleav'd, He chirp'd for joy to see himself deceiv'd. Fold now thine arms and hang the head, Like to a lily withered; Next look thou like a sickly moon, Or like Jocasta in a swoon; Then weep and sigh and softly go, Like to a widow drown'd in woe, Or like a virgin full of ruth For the lost sweetheart of her youth; And all because, fair maid, thou art Insensible of all my smart, And of those evil days that be Now posting on to punish thee. The gods are easy, and condemn All such as are not soft like them. Make me a heaven, and make me there Many a less and greater sphere: Make me the straight and oblique lines, The motions, lations and the signs. Make me a chariot and a sun, And let them through a zodiac run; Next place me zones and tropics there, With all the seasons of the year. Make me a sunset and a night, And then present the morning's light Cloth'd in her chamlets of delight. To these make clouds to pour down rain, With weather foul, then fair again. And when, wise artist, that thou hast With all that can be this heaven grac't, Ah! what is then this curious sky But only my Corinna's eye? What wisdom, learning, wit or worth Youth or sweet nature could bring forth Rests here with him who was the fame, The volume of himself and name. If, reader, then, thou wilt draw near And do an honour to thy tear, Weep then for him for whom laments Not one, but many monuments. And must we part, because some say Loud is our love, and loose our play, And more than well becomes the day? Alas for pity! and for us Most innocent, and injured thus! Had we kept close, or played within, Suspicion now had been the sin, And shame had followed long ere this, T' have plagued what now unpunished is. But we, as fearless of the sun, As faultless, will not wish undone What now is done, since where no sin Unbolts the door, no shame comes in . Then, comely and most fragrant maid, Be you more wary than afraid Of these reports, because you see The fairest most suspected be. The common forms have no one eye Or ear of burning jealousy To follow them: but chiefly where Love makes the cheek and chin a sphere To dance and play in, trust me, there Suspicion questions every hair. Come, you are fair, and should be seen While you are in your sprightful green: And what though you had been embraced By me were you for that unchaste? No, no! no more than is yond' moon Which, shining in her perfect noon, In all that great and glorious light, Continues cold as is the night. Then, beauteous maid, you may retire; And as for me, my chaste desire Shall move towards you, although I see Your face no more. So live you free From fame's black lips, as you from me. Suspicion, discontent, and strife Come in for dowry with a wife. Go, perjured man; and if thou e'er return To see the small remainders in mine urn, When thou shalt laugh at my religious dust, And ask: where's now the colour, form and trust Of woman's beauty? and with hand more rude Rifle the flowers which the virgins strewed: Know I have prayed to Fury that some wind May blow my ashes up, and strike thee blind. Cupid, as he lay among Roses, by a bee was stung; Whereupon, in anger flying To his mother, said thus, crying: Help! oh help! your boy's a-dying. And why, my pretty lad, said she? Then, blubbering, replied he: A winged snake has bitten me, Which country people call a bee. At which she smiled; then, with her hairs And kisses drying up his tears: Alas! said she, my wag, if this Such a pernicious torment is, Come tell me then, how great's the smart Of those thou woundest with thy dart! I burn, I burn; and beg of you To quench or cool me with your dew. I fry in fire, and so consume, Although the pile be all perfume. Alas! the heat and death's the same, Whether by choice or common flame, To be in oil of roses drowned, Or water; where's the comfort found? Both bring one death; and I die here Unless you cool me with a tear: Alas! I call; but ah! I see Ye cool and comfort all but me. To conquered men, some comfort 'tis to fall By the hand of him who is the general. Sitting alone, as one forsook, Close by a silver-shedding brook, With hands held up to love, I wept; And after sorrows spent I slept: Then in a vision I did see A glorious form appear to me: A virgin's face she had; her dress Was like a sprightly Spartaness. A silver bow, with green silk strung, Down from her comely shoulders hung: And as she stood, the wanton air Dangled the ringlets of her hair. Her legs were such Diana shows When, tucked up, she a-hunting goes; With buskins shortened to descry The happy dawning of her thigh: Which when I saw, I made access To kiss that tempting nakedness: But she forbade me with a wand Of myrtle she had in her hand: And, chiding me, said: Hence, remove, Herrick, thou art too coarse to love. You say, to me-wards your affection's strong; Pray love me little, so you love me long. Slowly goes far: the mean is best: desire, Grown violent, does either die or tire. 'Twas but a single rose, Till you on it did breathe; But since, methinks, it shows Not so much rose as wreath. In this little vault she lies, Here, with all her jealousies: Quiet yet; but if ye make Any noise they both will wake, And such spirits raise 'twill then Trouble death to lay again. Never was day so over-sick with showers But that it had some intermitting hours; Never was night so tedious but it knew The last watch out, and saw the dawning too; Never was dungeon so obscurely deep Wherein or light or day did never peep; Never did moon so ebb, or seas so wane, But they left hope-seed to fill up again. So you, my lord, though you have now your stay, Your night, your prison, and your ebb, you may Spring up afresh, when all these mists are spent, And star-like, once more gild our firmament. Let but that mighty Csar speak, and then All bolts, all bars, all gates shall cleave; as when That earthquake shook the house, and gave the stout Apostles way, unshackled, to go out. This, as I wish for, so I hope to see; Though you, my lord, have been unkind to me, To wound my heart, and never to apply, When you had power, the meanest remedy. Well, though my grief by you was gall'd the more, Yet I bring balm and oil to heal your sore. Cynthius, pluck ye by the ear, That ye may good doctrine hear; Play not with the maiden-hair, For each ringlet there's a snare. Cheek, and eye, and lip, and chin These are traps to take fools in. Arms, and hands, and all parts else, Are but toils, or manacles, Set on purpose to enthral Men, but slothfuls most of all. Live employed, and so live free From these fetters; like to me, Who have found, and still can prove, The lazy man the most doth love . Now, now's the time, so oft by truth Promis'd should come to crown your youth. Then, fair ones, do not wrong Your joys by staying long; Or let love's fire go out, By lingering thus in doubt; But learn that time once lost Is ne'er redeem'd by cost. Then away; come, Hymen, guide To the bed the bashful bride. Is it, sweet maid, your fault these holy Bridal rites go on so slowly? Dear, is it this you dread The loss of maidenhead? Believe me, you will most Esteem it when 'tis lost; Then it no longer keep, Lest issue lie asleep. Then, away; come, Hymen, guide To the bed the bashful bride. These precious, pearly, purling tears But spring from ceremonious fears. And 'tis but native shame That hides the loving flame, And may a while control The soft and am'rous soul; But yet love's fire will waste Such bashfulness at last. Then, away; come, Hymen, guide To the bed the bashful bride. Night now hath watch'd herself half blind, Yet not a maidenhead resign'd! 'Tis strange, ye will not fly To love's sweet mystery. Might yon full moon the sweets Have, promised to your sheets, She soon would leave her sphere, To be admitted there. Then, away; come, Hymen, guide To the bed the bashful bride. On, on devoutly, make no stay; While Domiduca leads the way, And Genius, who attends The bed for lucky ends. With Juno goes the Hours And Graces strewing flowers. And the boys with sweet tunes sing: Hymen, O Hymen, bring Home the turtles; Hymen, guide To the bed the bashful bride. Behold! how Hymen's taper-light Shows you how much is spent of night. See, see the bridegroom's torch Half wasted in the porch. And now those tapers five, That show the womb shall thrive, Their silv'ry flames advance, To tell all prosp'rous chance Still shall crown the happy life Of the goodman and the wife. Move forward then your rosy feet, And make whate'er they touch turn sweet. May all, like flowery meads, Smell where your soft foot treads; And everything assume To it the like perfume, As Zephyrus when he 'spires Through woodbine and sweetbriars. Then, away; come, Hymen, guide To the bed the bashful bride. And now the yellow veil at last Over her fragrant cheek is cast. Now seems she to express A bashful willingness: Showing a heart consenting, As with a will repenting. Then gently lead her on With wise suspicion; For that, matrons say, a measure Of that passion sweetens pleasure. You, you that be of her nearest kin, Now o'er the threshold force her in. But to avert the worst Let her her fillets first Knit to the posts, this point Remembering, to anoint The sides, for 'tis a charm Strong against future harm; And the evil deads, the which There was hidden by the witch. O Venus! thou to whom is known The best way how to loose the zone Of virgins, tell the maid She need not be afraid, And bid the youth apply Close kisses if she cry, And charge he not forbears Her though she woo with tears. Tell them now they must adventure, Since that love and night bid enter. No fatal owl the bedstead keeps, With direful notes to fright your sleeps; No furies here about To put the tapers out, Watch or did make the bed: 'Tis omen full of dread; But all fair signs appear Within the chamber here. Juno here far off doth stand, Cooling sleep with charming wand. Virgins, weep not; 'twill come when, As she, so you'll be ripe for men. Then grieve her not with saying She must no more a-maying, Or by rosebuds divine Who'll be her valentine. Nor name those wanton reaks You've had at barley-breaks, But now kiss her and thus say, Take time, lady, while ye may. Now bar the doors; the bridegroom puts The eager boys to gather nuts. And now both love and time To their full height do climb: Oh! give them active heat And moisture both complete: Fit organs for increase, To keep and to release That which may the honour'd stem Circle with a diadem. And now, behold! the bed or couch That ne'er knew bride's or bridegroom's touch, Feels in itself a fire; And, tickled with desire, Pants with a downy breast, As with a heart possesst, Shrugging as it did move Ev'n with the soul of love. And, oh! had it but a tongue, Doves, 'twould say, ye bill too long. O enter then! but see ye shun A sleep until the act be done. Let kisses in their close, Breathe as the damask rose, Or sweet as is that gum Doth from Panchaia come. Teach nature now to know Lips can make cherries grow Sooner than she ever yet In her wisdom could beget. On your minutes, hours, days, months, years, Drop the fat blessing of the spheres. That good which heav'n can give To make you bravely live Fall like a spangling dew By day and night on you. May fortune's lily-hand Open at your command; With all lucky birds to side With the bridegroom and the bride. Let bounteous Fate your spindles full Fill, and wind up with whitest wool. Let them not cut the thread Of life until ye bid. May death yet come at last, And not with desp'rate haste, But when ye both can say Come, let us now away, Be ye to the barn then borne, Two, like two ripe shocks of corn. When Julia chid I stood as mute the while As is the fish or tongueless crocodile. Air coin'd to words my Julia could not hear, But she could see each eye to stamp a tear; By which mine angry mistress might descry Tears are the noble language of the eye. And when true love of words is destitute The eyes by tears speak, while the tongue is mute. Let all chaste matrons, when they chance to see My num'rous issue, praise and pity me: Praise me for having such a fruitful womb, Pity me, too, who found so soon a tomb. I'll come to thee in all those shapes As Jove did when he made his rapes, Only I'll not appear to thee As he did once to Semele. Thunder and lightning I'll lay by, To talk with thee familiarly. Which done, then quickly we'll undress To one and th' other's nakedness, And, ravish'd, plunge into the bed, Bodies and souls commingled, And kissing, so as none may hear, We'll weary all the fables there. It is sufficient if we pray To Jove, who gives and takes away: Let him the land and living find; Let me alone to fit the mind. Noonday and midnight shall at once be seen: Trees, at one time, shall be both sere and green: Fire and water shall together lie In one self-sweet-conspiring sympathy: Summer and winter shall at one time show Ripe ears of corn, and up to th' ears in snow: Seas shall be sandless; fields devoid of grass; Shapeless the world, as when all chaos was, Before, my dear Perilla, I will be False to my vow, or fall away from thee. If I kiss Anthea's breast, There I smell the phnix nest: If her lip, the most sincere Altar of incense I smell there Hands, and thighs, and legs are all Richly aromatical. Goddess Isis can't transfer Musks and ambers more from her: Nor can Juno sweeter be, When she lies with Jove, than she. Permit me, Julia, now to go away; Or by thy love decree me here to stay. If thou wilt say that I shall live with thee, Here shall my endless tabernacle be: If not, as banish'd, I will live alone There where no language ever yet was known. Love-sick I am, and must endure A desperate grief, that finds no cure. Ah me! I try; and trying, prove No herbs have power to cure love. Only one sovereign salve I know, And that is death, the end of woe. Though a wise man all pressures can sustain, His virtue still is sensible of pain: Large shoulders though he has, and well can bear, He feels when packs do pinch him, and the where. And cruel maid, because I see You scornful of my love and me, I'll trouble you no more; but go My way where you shall never know What is become of me: there I Will find me out a path to die, Or learn some way how to forget You and your name for ever: yet, Ere I go hence, know this from me, What will, in time, your fortune be: This to your coyness I will tell, And, having spoke it once, farewell. The lily will not long endure, Nor the snow continue pure; The rose, the violet, one day, See, both these lady-flowers decay: And you must fade as well as they. And it may chance that Love may turn, And, like to mine, make your heart burn And weep to see't; yet this thing do, That my last vow commends to you: When you shall see that I am dead, For pity let a tear be shed; And, with your mantle o'er me cast, Give my cold lips a kiss at last: If twice you kiss you need not fear That I shall stir or live more here. Next, hollow out a tomb to cover Me me, the most despisd lover, And write thereon: This, reader, know: Love kill'd this man . No more, but so. Sweet, be not proud of those two eyes Which, starlike, sparkle in their skies; Nor be you proud that you can see All hearts your captives, yours yet free; Be you not proud of that rich hair Which wantons with the love-sick air; Whenas that ruby which you wear, Sunk from the tip of your soft ear, Will last to be a precious stone When all your world of beauty's gone. To find that tree of life whose fruits did feed And leaves did heal all sick of human seed: To find Bethesda and an angel there Stirring the waters, I am come; and here, At last, I find after my much to do The tree, Bethesda and the angel too: And all in your blest hand, which has the powers Of all those suppling-healing herbs and flowers. To that soft charm, that spell, that magic bough, That high enchantment, I betake me now, And to that hand the branch of heaven's fair tree , I kneel for help; O! lay that hand on me, Adored Csar! and my faith is such I shall be heal'd if that my king but touch. The evil is not yours: my sorrow sings, Mine is the evil, but the cure the king's. Water, water I espy; Come and cool ye, all who fry In your loves; but none as I. Though a thousand showers be Still a-falling, yet I see Not one drop to light on me. Happy you who can have seas For to quench ye, or some ease From your kinder mistresses. I have one, and she alone, Of a thousand thousand known, Dead to all compassion. Such an one as will repeat Both the cause and make the heat More by provocation great. Gentle friends, though I despair Of my cure, do you beware Of those girls which cruel are. Am I despised because you say, And I dare swear, that I am gray? Know, lady, you have but your day: And time will come when you shall wear Such frost and snow upon your hair; And when though long, it comes to pass You question with your looking-glass; And in that sincere crystal seek, But find no rose-bud in your cheek: Nor any bed to give the show Where such a rare carnation grew. Ah! then too late, close in your chamber keeping, It will be told That you are old, By those true tears y'are weeping. If 'mongst my many poems I can see One only worthy to be wash'd by thee, I live for ever, let the rest all lie In dens of darkness or condemn'd to die. Love like a gipsy lately came, And did me much importune To see my hand, that by the same He might foretell my fortune. He saw my palm, and then, said he, I tell thee by this score here, That thou within few months shalt be The youthful Prince d'Amour here. I smil'd, and bade him once more prove, And by some cross-line show it, That I could ne'er be prince of love, Though here the princely poet. Virgins, time-past, known were these, Troubled with green-sicknesses: Turn'd to flowers, still the hue, Sickly girls, they bear of you. Whom should I fear to write to if I can Stand before you, my learn'd diocesan? And never show blood-guiltiness or fear To see my lines excathedrated here. Since none so good are but you may condemn, Or here so bad but you may pardon them. If then, my lord, to sanctify my muse One only poem out of all you'll choose, And mark it for a rapture nobly writ, 'Tis good confirm'd, for you have bishop'd it. I saw about her spotless wrist, Of blackest silk, a curious twist; Which, circumvolving gently, there Enthrall'd her arm as prisoner. Dark was the jail, but as if light Had met t'engender with the night; Or so as darkness made a stay To show at once both night and day. One fancy more! but if there be Such freedom in captivity, I beg of Love that ever I May in like chains of darkness lie. I fear no earthly powers, But care for crowns of flowers; And love to have my beard With wine and oil besmear'd. This day I'll drown all sorrow: Who knows to live to-morrow? Julia, I bring To thee this ring, Made for thy finger fit; To show by this That our love is Or should be like to it. Close though it be The joint is free; So, when love's yoke is on, It must not gall, Or fret at all With hard oppression. But it must play Still either way, And be, too, such a yoke As not too wide To overslide, Or be so strait to choke. So we who bear This beam must rear Ourselves to such a height As that the stay Of either may Create the burden light. And as this round Is nowhere found To flaw, or else to sever: So let our love As endless prove, And pure as gold for ever. Where others love and praise my verses, still Thy long black thumb-nail marks them out for ill: A fellon take it, or some whitflaw come For to unslate or to untile that thumb! But cry thee mercy: exercise thy nails To scratch or claw, so that thy tongue not rails: Some numbers prurient are, and some of these Are wanton with their itch; scratch, and 'twill please. I ask'd thee oft what poets thou hast read, And lik'st the best. Still thou reply'st: The dead. I shall, ere long, with green turfs cover'd be; Then sure thou'lt like or thou wilt envy me. Thy azure robe I did behold As airy as the leaves of gold, Which, erring here, and wandering there, Pleas'd with transgression ev'rywhere: Sometimes 'twould pant, and sigh, and heave, As if to stir it scarce had leave: But, having got it, thereupon 'Twould make a brave expansion. And pounc'd with stars it showed to me Like a celestial canopy. Sometimes 'twould blaze, and then abate, Like to a flame grown moderate: Sometimes away 'twould wildly fling, Then to thy thighs so closely cling That some conceit did melt me down As lovers fall into a swoon: And, all confus'd, I there did lie Drown'd in delights, but could not die. That leading cloud I follow'd still, Hoping t' have seen of it my fill; But ah! I could not: should it move To life eternal, I could love. Begin to charm, and, as thou strok'st mine ears With thy enchantment, melt me into tears. Then let thy active hand scud o'er thy lyre, And make my spirits frantic with the fire. That done, sink down into a silvery strain, And make me smooth as balm and oil again. To safeguard man from wrongs, there nothing must Be truer to him than a wise distrust. And to thyself be best this sentence known: Hear all men speak, but credit few or none . Get up, get up for shame, the blooming morn Upon her wings presents the god unshorn. See how Aurora throws her fair Fresh-quilted colours through the air: Get up, sweet slug-a-bed, and see The dew bespangling herb and tree. Each flower has wept and bow'd toward the east Above an hour since: yet you not dress'd; Nay! not so much as out of bed? When all the birds have matins said And sung their thankful hymns, 'tis sin, Nay, profanation to keep in, Whereas a thousand virgins on this day Spring, sooner than the lark, to fetch in May. Rise and put on your foliage, and be seen To come forth, like the spring-time, fresh and green, And sweet as Flora. Take no care Fear not; the leaves will strew Gems in abundance upon you: Besides, the childhood of the day has kept, Against you come, some orient pearls unwept; Come and receive them while the light Hangs on the dew-locks of the night: And Titan on the eastern hill Retires himself, or else stands still Till you come forth. Wash, dress, be brief in praying: Few beads are best when once we go a-Maying. Come, my Corinna, come; and, coming, mark How each field turns a street, each street a park Made green and trimm'd with trees: see how Devotion gives each house a bough Or branch: each porch, each door ere this An ark, a tabernacle is, Made up of white-thorn neatly interwove; As if here were those cooler shades of love. Can such delights be in the street And open fields and we not see't? Come, we'll abroad; and let's obey The proclamation made for May: And sin no more, as we have done, by staying; But, my Corinna, come, let's go a-Maying. There's not a budding boy or girl this day But is got up, and gone to bring in May. A deal of youth, ere this, is come Back, and with white-thorn laden home. Some have despatch'd their cakes and cream Before that we have left to dream: And some have wept, and woo'd, and plighted troth, And chose their priest, ere we can cast off sloth: Many a green-gown has been given; Many a kiss, both odd and even: Many a glance too has been sent From out the eye, love's firmament; Many a jest told of the keys betraying This night, and locks pick'd, yet we're not a-Maying. Come, let us go while we are in our prime; And take the harmless folly of the time. We shall grow old apace, and die Before we know our liberty. Our life is short, and our days run As fast away as does the sun; And, as a vapour or a drop of rain, Once lost, can ne'er be found again, So when or you or I are made A fable, song, or fleeting shade, All love, all liking, all delight Lies drowned with us in endless night. Then while time serves, and we are but decaying, Come, my Corinna, come, let's go a-Maying. Breathe, Julia, breathe, and I'll protest, Nay more, I'll deeply swear, That all the spices of the east Are circumfused there. But born, and like a short delight, I glided by my parents' sight. That done, the harder fates denied My longer stay, and so I died. If, pitying my sad parents' tears, You'll spill a tear or two with theirs, And with some flowers my grave bestrew, Love and they'll thank you for't. Adieu. While, Lydia, I was loved of thee, Nor any was preferred 'fore me To hug thy whitest neck, than I The Persian king lived not more happily. While thou no other didst affect, Nor Chloe was of more respect Than Lydia, far-famed Lydia, I flourished more than Roman Ilia. Now Thracian Chloe governs me, Skilful i' th' harp and melody; For whose affection, Lydia, I So fate spares her am well content to die. My heart now set on fire is By Ornithes' son, young Calais, For whose commutual flames here I, To save his life, twice am content to die. Say our first loves we should revoke, And, severed, join in brazen yoke; Admit I Chloe put away, And love again love-cast-off Lydia? Though mine be brighter than the star, Thou lighter than the cork by far, Rough as the Adriatic sea, yet I Will live with thee, or else for thee will die. As Julia once a-slumbering lay It chanced a bee did fly that way, After a dew or dew-like shower, To tipple freely in a flower. For some rich flower he took the lip Of Julia, and began to sip; But when he felt he sucked from thence Honey, and in the quintessence, He drank so much he scarce could stir, So Julia took the pilferer. And thus surprised, as filchers use, He thus began himself t' excuse: Sweet lady-flower, I never brought Hither the least one thieving thought; But, taking those rare lips of yours For some fresh, fragrant, luscious flowers, I thought I might there take a taste, Where so much syrup ran at waste. Besides, know this: I never sting The flower that gives me nourishing; But with a kiss, or thanks, do pay For honey that I bear away. This said, he laid his little scrip Of honey 'fore her ladyship: And told her, as some tears did fall, That that he took, and that was all. At which she smiled, and bade him go And take his bag; but thus much know: When next he came a-pilfering so, He should from her full lips derive Honey enough to fill his hive. Not all thy flushing suns are set, Herrick, as yet; Nor doth this far-drawn hemisphere Frown and look sullen ev'rywhere. Days may conclude in nights, and suns may rest As dead within the west; Yet, the next morn, regild the fragrant east. Alas! for me, that I have lost E'en all almost; Sunk is my sight, set is my sun, And all the loom of life undone: The staff, the elm, the prop, the shelt'ring wall Whereon my vine did crawl, Now, now blown down; needs must the old stock fall. Yet, Porter, while thou keep'st alive, In death I thrive: And like a phnix re-aspire From out my nard and fun'ral fire: And as I prune my feathered youth, so I Do mar'l how I could die When I had thee, my chief preserver, by. I'm up, I'm up, and bless that hand Which makes me stand Now as I do, and but for thee I must confess I could not be. The debt is paid; for he who doth resign Thanks to the gen'rous vine Invites fresh grapes to fill his press with wine. Life of my life, 'take not so soon thy flight, But stay the time till we have bade good-night. Thou hast both wind and tide with thee; thy way As soon despatch'd is by the night as day. Let us not then so rudely henceforth go Till we have wept, kissed, sigh'd, shook hands, or so. There's pain in parting, and a kind of hell, When once true lovers take their last farewell. What! shall we two our endless leaves take here Without a sad look or a solemn tear? He knows not love that hath not this truth proved, Love is most loth to leave the thing beloved . Pay we our vows and go; yet when we part, Then, even then, I will bequeath my heart Into thy loving hands; for I'll keep none To warm my breast when thou, my pulse, art gone. No, here I'll last, and walk a harmless shade About this urn wherein thy dust is laid, To guard it so as nothing here shall be Heavy to hurt those sacred seeds of thee. Sadly I walk'd within the field, To see what comfort it would yield; And as I went my private way An olive branch before me lay, And seeing it I made a stay, And took it up and view'd it; then Kissing the omen, said Amen; Be, be it so, and let this be A divination unto me; That in short time my woes shall cease And Love shall crown my end with peace. Ye may simper, blush and smile, And perfume the air awhile; But, sweet things, ye must be gone, Fruit, ye know, is coming on; Then, ah! then, where is your grace, Whenas cherries come in place? White though ye be, yet, lilies, know, From the first ye were not so; But I'll tell ye What befell ye: Cupid and his mother lay In a cloud, while both did play, He with his pretty finger press'd The ruby niplet of her breast; Out of which the cream of light, Like to a dew, Fell down on you And made ye white. Ah, cruel love! must I endure Thy many scorns and find no cure? Say, are thy medicines made to be Helps to all others but to me? I'll leave thee and to pansies come, Comforts you'll afford me some; You can ease my heart and do What love could ne'er be brought unto. What was't that fell but now From that warm kiss of ours? Look, look! by love I vow They were two gilly-flowers. Let's kiss and kiss again, For if so be our closes Make gilly-flowers, then I'm sure they'll fashion roses. You have beheld a smiling rose When virgins' hands have drawn O'er it a cobweb-lawn; And here you see this lily shows, Tomb'd in a crystal stone, More fair in this transparent case Than when it grew alone And had but single grace. You see how cream but naked is Nor dances in the eye Without a strawberry, Or some fine tincture like to this, Which draws the sight thereto More by that wantoning with it Than when the paler hue No mixture did admit. You see how amber through the streams More gently strokes the sight With some conceal'd delight Than when he darts his radiant beams Into the boundless air; Where either too much light his worth Doth all at once impair, Or set it little forth. Put purple grapes or cherries in- To glass, and they will send More beauty to commend Them from that clean and subtle skin Than if they naked stood, And had no other pride at all But their own flesh and blood And tinctures natural. Thus lily, rose, grape, cherry, cream, And strawberry do stir More love when they transfer A weak, a soft, a broken beam, Than if they should discover At full their proper excellence; Without some scene cast over To juggle with the sense. Thus let this crystal'd lily be A rule how far to teach Your nakedness must reach; And that no further than we see Those glaring colours laid By art's wise hand, but to this end They should obey a shade, Lest they too far extend. So though you're white as swan or snow, And have the power to move A world of men to love, Yet when your lawns and silks shall flow, And that white cloud divide Into a doubtful twilight, then, Then will your hidden pride Raise greater fires in men. Like to a bride, come forth, my book, at last, Say, if there be, 'mongst many gems here, one Deserveless of the name of paragon; Blush not at all for that, since we have set Some pearls on queens that have been counterfeit. Thou who wilt not love, do this, Learn of me what woman is. Something made of thread and thrum. A mere botch of all and some. Pieces, patches, ropes of hair; Inlaid garbage everywhere. Outside silk and outside lawn; Scenes to cheat us neatly drawn. False in legs, and false in thighs; False in breast, teeth, hair, and eyes; False in head, and false enough; Only true in shreds and stuff. While leanest beasts in pastures feed, The fattest ox the first must bleed . So soft streams meet, so springs with gladder smiles Meet after long divorcement by the isles; When love, the child of likeness, urgeth on Their crystal natures to a union: So meet stolen kisses, when the moony nights Call forth fierce lovers to their wish'd delights; So kings and queens meet, when desire convinces All thoughts but such as aim at getting princes, As I meet thee. Soul of my life and fame! Eternal lamp of love! whose radiant flame Out-glares the heaven's Osiris, and thy gleams Out-shine the splendour of his mid-day beams. Welcome, O welcome, my illustrious spouse; Welcome as are the ends unto my vows; Aye! far more welcome than the happy soil The sea-scourged merchant, after all his toil, Salutes with tears of joy, when fires betray The smoky chimneys of his Ithaca. Where hast thou been so long from my embraces, Poor pitied exile? Tell me, did thy graces Fly discontented hence, and for a time Did rather choose to bless another clime? Or went'st thou to this end, the more to move me, By thy short absence, to desire and love thee? Why frowns my sweet? Why won't my saint confer Favours on me, her fierce idolater? Why are those looks, those looks the which have been Time-past so fragrant, sickly now drawn in Like a dull twilight? Tell me, and the fault I'll expiate with sulphur, hair and salt; And, with the crystal humour of the spring, Purge hence the guilt and kill this quarrelling. Wo't thou not smile or tell me what's amiss? Have I been cold to hug thee, too remiss, Too temp'rate in embracing? Tell me, has desire To thee-ward died i' th' embers, and no fire Left in this rak'd-up ash-heap as a mark To testify the glowing of a spark? Have I divorc'd thee only to combine In hot adult'ry with another wine? True, I confess I left thee, and appeal 'Twas done by me more to confirm my zeal And double my affection on thee, as do those Whose love grows more inflam'd by being foes. But to forsake thee ever, could there be A thought of such-like possibility? When thou thyself dar'st say thy isles shall lack Grapes before Herrick leaves canary sack. Thou mak'st me airy, active to be borne, Like Iphiclus, upon the tops of corn. Thou mak'st me nimble, as the winged hours, To dance and caper on the heads of flowers, And ride the sunbeams. Can there be a thing Under the heavenly Isis that can bring More love unto my life, or can present My genius with a fuller blandishment? Help from the garlic, onion and the leek And pay no vows to thee, who wast their best God, and far more transcendent than the rest? Had Cassius, that weak water-drinker, known Thee in thy vine, or had but tasted one Small chalice of thy frantic liquor, he, As the wise Cato, had approv'd of thee. Had not Jove's son, that brave Tirynthian swain, Invited to the Thesbian banquet, ta'en Full goblets of thy gen'rous blood, his sprite Ne'er had kept heat for fifty maids that night. Come, come and kiss me; love and lust commends Thee and thy beauties; kiss, we will be friends Too strong for fate to break us. Look upon Me with that full pride of complexion As queens meet queens, or come thou unto me As Cleopatra came to Anthony, When her high carriage did at once present To the triumvir love and wonderment. Swell up my nerves with spirit; let my blood Run through my veins like to a hasty flood. Fill each part full of fire, active to do What thy commanding soul shall put it to; And till I turn apostate to thy love, Which here I vow to serve, do not remove Thy fires from me, but Apollo's curse Blast these-like actions, or a thing that's worse. When these circumstants shall but live to see The time that I prevaricate from thee. Call me the son of beer, and then confine Me to the tap, the toast, the turf; let wine Ne'er shine upon me; may my numbers all Run to a sudden death and funeral. And last, when thee, dear spouse, I disavow, Ne'er may prophetic Daphne crown my brow. My faithful friend, if you can see The fruit to grow up, or the tree; If you can see the colour come Into the blushing pear or plum; If you can see the water grow To cakes of ice or flakes of snow; If you can see that drop of rain Lost in the wild sea once again; If you can see how dreams do creep Into the brain by easy sleep: Then there is hope that you may see Her love me once who now hates me. Now is the time for mirth, For, with the flowery earth, The golden pomp is come. The golden pomp is come; For now each tree does wear. Made of her pap and gum, Rich beads of amber here. Now reigns the rose, and now Th' Arabian dew besmears My uncontrolled brow And my retorted hairs. Homer, this health to thee, In sack of such a kind That it would make thee see Though thou wert ne'er so blind. Next, Virgil I'll call forth To pledge this second health In wine, whose each cup's worth An Indian commonwealth. A goblet next I'll drink To Ovid, and suppose, Made he the pledge, he'd think The world had all one nose. Then this immensive cup Of aromatic wine, Catullus, I quaff up To that terse muse of thine. Wild I am now with heat: O Bacchus, cool thy rays! Or, frantic, I shall eat Thy thyrse and bite the bays. Round, round the roof does run, And, being ravish'd thus, Come, I will drink a tun Now, to Tibullus, next, This flood I drink to thee: But stay, I see a text That this presents to me. Behold, Tibullus lies Here burnt, whose small return Of ashes scarce suffice To fill a little urn. Trust to good verses then; They only will aspire When pyramids, as men, Are lost i' th' funeral fire. And when all bodies meet In Lethe to be drown'd, Then only numbers sweet With endless life are crown'd. Fair was the dawn, and but e'en now the skies Show'd like to cream inspir'd with strawberries, But on a sudden all was chang'd and gone That smil'd in that first sweet complexion. Then thunder-claps and lightning did conspire To tear the world, or set it all on fire. What trust to things below, whenas we see, As men, the heavens have their hypocrisy? For my part, I never care For those lips that tongue-tied are: Tell-tales I would have them be Of my mistress and of me. Let them prattle how that I Sometimes freeze and sometimes fry: Let them tell how she doth move Fore or backward in her love: Let them speak by gentle tones, One and th' other's passions: How we watch, and seldom sleep; How by willows we do weep; How by stealth we meet, and then Kiss, and sigh, so part again. This the lips we will permit For to tell, not publish it. Thou'st dar'd too far; but, fury, now forbear To give the least disturbance to her hair: But less presume to lay a plait upon Her skin's most smooth and clear expansion. 'Tis like a lawny firmament as yet, Quite dispossess'd of either fray or fret. Come thou not near that film so finely spread, Where no one piece is yet unlevelled. This if thou dost, woe to thee, fury, woe, I'll send such frost, such hail, such sleet, and snow, Such flesh-quakes, palsies, and such fears as shall Dead thee to th' most, if not destroy thee all. And thou a thousand thousand times shalt be More shak'd thyself than she is scorch'd by thee. Welcome, maids-of-honour! You do bring In the spring, And wait upon her. She has virgins many, Fresh and fair; Yet you are More sweet than any. You're the maiden posies, And so grac'd To be plac'd 'Fore damask roses. Yet, though thus respected, By-and-by Ye do lie, Poor girls, neglected. Stay while ye will, or go And leave no scent behind ye: Yet, trust me, I shall know The place where I may find ye. Within my Lucia's cheek, Whose livery ye wear, Play ye at hide or seek, I'm sure to find ye there. Gather ye rosebuds while ye may, Old time is still a-flying: And this same flower that smiles to-day To-morrow will be dying. The glorious lamp of heaven, the sun, The higher he's a-getting, The sooner will his race be run, And nearer he's to setting. That age is best which is the first, When youth and blood are warmer; But being spent, the worse, and worst Times still succeed the former. Then be not coy, but use your time, And while ye may go marry: For having lost but once your prime You may for ever tarry. For my neighbour I'll not know, Whether high he builds or no: Only this I'll look upon, Firm be my foundation. Sound or unsound, let it be! 'Tis the lot ordain'd for me. He who to the ground does fall Has not whence to sink at all . Play I could once; but, gentle friend, you see My harp hung up here on the willow tree. Sing I could once; and bravely, too, inspire With luscious numbers my melodious lyre. Draw I could once, although not stocks or stones, Amphion-like, men made of flesh and bones, Whither I would; but ah! I know not how, I feel in me this transmutation now. Grief, my dear friend, has first my harp unstrung, Wither'd my hand, and palsy-struck my tongue. Only a little more I have to write, Then I'll give o'er, And bid the world good-night. 'Tis but a flying minute That I must stay, Or linger in it; And then I must away. O time that cut'st down all And scarce leav'st here Of any men that were. How many lie forgot In vaults beneath? And piecemeal rot Without a fame in death? Behold this living stone I rear for me, Ne'er to be thrown Down, envious Time, by thee. Pillars let some set up If so they please: Here is my hope What though the sea be calm? Trust to the shore, Ships have been drown'd where late they danc'd before. Good-day, Mirtillo. Mirt. And to you no less, And all fair signs lead on our shepherdess. With all white luck to you. But say, what news Stirs in our sheep-walk? None, save that my ewes, My wethers, lambs, and wanton kids are well, Smooth, fair and fat! none better I can tell: Or that this day Menalcas keeps a feast For his sheep-shearers. True, these are the least; But, dear Amintas and sweet Amarillis, Rest but a while here, by this bank of lilies, And lend a gentle ear to one report The country has. From whence? From whence? Three days before the shutting in of May With whitest wool be ever crown'd that day! To all our joy a sweet-fac'd child was born, More tender than the childhood of the morn. Pan pipe to him, and bleats of lambs and sheep Let lullaby the pretty prince asleep! And that his birth should be more singular At noon of day was seen a silver star, Bright as the wise men's torch which guided them To God's sweet babe, when born at Bethlehem; While golden angels some have told to me Sung out his birth with heavenly minstrelsy. O rare! But is't a trespass if we three Should wend along his babyship to see? But if it chance to prove At most a fault, 'tis but a fault of love. But, dear Mirtillo, I have heard it told Those learned men brought incense, myrrh and gold From countries far, with store of spices sweet, And laid them down for offerings at his feet. 'Tis true, indeed; and each of us will bring Unto our smiling and our blooming king A neat, though not so great an offering. A garland for my gift shall be Of flowers ne'er suck'd by th' thieving bee; And all most sweet; yet all less sweet than he. And I will bear, along with you, Leaves dropping down the honeyed dew, With oaten pipes as sweet as new. And I a sheep-hook will bestow, To have his little kingship know, As he is prince, he's shepherd too. Come, let's away, and quickly let's be dress'd, And quickly give the swiftest grace is best . And when before him we have laid our treasures, We'll bless the babe, then back to country pleasures. Good speed, for I this day Betimes my matins say: Begin to woo, Sweet-singing lark, Be thou the clerk, And know thy when To say, Amen. And if I prove Bless'd in my love, Then thou shalt be High-priest to me, At my return, To incense burn; And so to solemnise Love's and my sacrifice. To my revenge and to her desperate fears Fly, thou made bubble of my sighs and tears. In the wild air when thou hast rolled about, And, like a blasting planet, found her out. Stoop, mount, pass by to take her eye, then glare Like to a dreadful comet in the air: Next, when thou dost perceive her fixed sight For thy revenge to be most opposite, Then, like a globe or ball of wild-fire, fly, And break thyself in shivers on her eye. You are a tulip seen to-day, But, dearest, of so short a stay That where you grew scarce man can say. You are a lovely July-flower, Yet one rude wind or ruffling shower Will force you hence, and in an hour. You are a sparkling rose i' th' bud, Yet lost ere that chaste flesh and blood Can show where you or grew or stood. You are a full-spread, fair-set vine, And can with tendrils love entwine, Yet dried ere you distil your wine. You are like balm enclosed well In amber, or some crystal shell, Yet lost ere you transfuse your smell. You are a dainty violet, Yet wither'd ere you can be set Within the virgin's coronet. You are the queen all flowers among, But die you must, fair maid, ere long, As he, the maker of this song. From this bleeding hand of mine Take this sprig of eglantine, Which, though sweet unto your smell, Yet the fretful briar will tell, He who plucks the sweets shall prove Many thorns to be in love. Gold I've none, for use or show, Neither silver to bestow At my death; but this much know; That each lyric here shall be Of my love a legacy, Left to all posterity. Gentle friends, then do but please To accept such coins as these As my last remembrances. Hence, hence, profane! soft silence let us have While we this trental sing about thy grave. Had wolves or tigers seen but thee, They would have showed civility; And, in compassion of thy years, Washed those thy purple wounds with tears. But since thou'rt slain, and in thy fall The drooping kingdom suffers all; This we will do, we'll daily come And offer tears upon thy tomb: And if that they will not suffice, Thou shall have souls for sacrifice. Sleep in thy peace, while we with spice perfume thee, And cedar wash thee, that no times consume thee. Live, live thou dost, and shall; for why? Souls do not with their bodies die : Ignoble offsprings, they may fall Into the flames of funeral: Whenas the chosen seed shall spring Fresh, and for ever flourishing. And times to come shall, weeping, read thy glory Less in these marble stones than in thy story. Dear Perenna, prithee come And with smallage dress my tomb: Add a cypress sprig thereto, With a tear, and so Adieu. Rare temples thou hast seen, I know, And rich for in and outward show: Survey this chapel, built alone, Without or lime, or wood, or stone: Then say if one thou'st seen more fine Than this, the fairies' once, now thine. A way enchased with glass and beads There is, that to the chapel leads: Whose structure, for his holy rest, Is here the halcyon's curious nest: Into the which who looks shall see His temple of idolatry, Where he of godheads has such store, As Rome's pantheon had not more. His house of Rimmon this he calls, Girt with small bones instead of walls. First, in a niche, more black than jet, His idol-cricket there is set: Then in a polished oval by There stands his idol-beetle-fly: Next in an arch, akin to this, His idol-canker seated is: Then in a round is placed by these His golden god, Cantharides. So that, where'er ye look, ye see, No capital, no cornice free, Or frieze, from this fine frippery. Now this the fairies would have known, Theirs is a mixed religion: And some have heard the elves it call Part pagan, part papistical. If unto me all tongues were granted, I could not speak the saints here painted. Who 'gainst Mab's-state placed here right is; Saint Will o' th' Wisp, of no great bigness, But alias called here Fatuus ignis ; Neither those other saintships will I Here go about for to recite Their number, almost infinite, Which one by one here set down are In this most curious calendar. First, at the entrance of the gate A little puppet-priest doth wait, Who squeaks to all the comers there: Favour your tongues who enter here; Pure hands bring hither without stain. A second pules: Hence, hence, profane! Hard by, i' th' shell of half a nut, The holy-water there is put: A little brush of squirrel's hairs Composed of odd, not even pairs, Stands in the platter, or close by, To purge the fairy family. Near to the altar stands the priest, There off'ring up the Holy Grist, Ducking in mood and perfect tense, With much-good-do-'t him reverence. The altar is not here four-square, Nor in a form triangular, Nor made of glass, or wood, or stone, But of a little transverse bone; Which boys and bruckel'd children call Playing for points and pins cockal. Whose linen drapery is a thin Subtile and ductile codlin's skin: Which o'er the board is smoothly spread With little seal-work damasked. The fringe that circumbinds it too Is spangle-work of trembling dew, Which, gently gleaming, makes a show Like frost-work glitt'ring on the snow. Upon this fetuous board doth stand Something for show-bread, and at hand, Just in the middle of the altar, Upon an end, the fairy-psalter, Grac'd with the trout-flies' curious wings, Which serve for watchet ribbonings. Now, we must know, the elves are led Right by the rubric which they read. And, if report of them be true, They have their text for what they do; Aye, and their book of canons too. And, as Sir Thomas Parson tells, They have their book of articles; And, if that fairy-knight not lies, They have their book of homilies; And other scriptures that design A short but righteous discipline. The basin stands the board upon To take the free oblation: A little pin-dust, which they hold More precious than we prize our gold Which charity they give to many Poor of the parish, if there's any. Upon the ends of these neat rails, Hatch'd with the silver-light of snails, The elves in formal manner fix Two pure and holy candlesticks: In either which a small tall bent Burns for the altar's ornament. For sanctity they have to these Their curious copes and surplices Of cleanest cobweb hanging by In their religious vestery. They have their ash-pans and their brooms To purge the chapel and the rooms; Their many mumbling Mass-priests here, And many a dapper chorister, Their ush'ring vergers, here likewise Their canons and their chanteries. Of cloister-monks they have enow, Aye, and their abbey-lubbers too; And, if their legend do not lie, They much affect the papacy. And since the last is dead, there's hope Elf Boniface shall next be pope . They have their cups and chalices; Their pardons and indulgences; Their beads of nits, bells, books, and wax Candles, forsooth, and other knacks; Their holy oil, their fasting spittle; Their sacred salt here, not a little; Dry chips, old shoes, rags, grease and bones; Beside their fumigations To drive the devil from the cod-piece Of the friar of work an odd piece . Many a trifle, too, and trinket, And for what use, scarce man would think it. Next, then, upon the chanters' side An apple's core is hung up dri'd, With rattling kernels, which is rung To call to morn and even-song. The saint to which the most he prays And offers incense nights and days, The lady of the lobster is, Whose foot-pace he doth stroke and kiss; And humbly chives of saffron brings For his most cheerful offerings. When, after these, h'as paid his vows He lowly to the altar bows; And then he dons the silk-worm's shed, Like a Turk's turban on his head, And reverently departeth thence, Hid in a cloud of frankincense, And by the glow-worm's light well guided, Goes to the feast that's now provided. My muse in meads has spent her many hours, Sitting, and sorting several sorts of flowers To make for others garlands, and to set On many a head here many a coronet; But, amongst all encircled here, not one Gave her a day of coronation, Till you, sweet mistress, came and interwove A laurel for her, ever young as love You first of all crown'd her: she must of due Render for that a crown of life to you. If, after rude and boisterous seas, My wearied pinnace here finds ease; If so it be I've gained the shore With safety of a faithful oar; If, having run my barque on ground, Ye see the aged vessel crown'd: What's to be done, but on the sands Ye dance and sing and now clap hands? The first act's doubtful, but we say It is the last commends the play. When I through all my many poems look, And see yourself to beautify my book, Methinks that only lustre doth appear A light fulfilling all the region here. Gild still with flames this firmament, and be A lamp eternal to my poetry. Which, if it now or shall hereafter shine, 'Twas by your splendour, lady, not by mine. The oil was yours; and that I owe for yet: He pays the half who does confess the debt . Charm me asleep and melt me so With thy delicious numbers, That, being ravished, hence I go Away in easy slumbers. Ease my sick head And make my bed, Thou power that canst sever From me this ill; And quickly still, Though thou not kill, My fever. Thou sweetly canst convert the same From a consuming fire Into a gentle-licking flame, And make it thus expire. Then make me weep My pains asleep; And give me such reposes That I, poor I, May think thereby I live and die 'Mongst roses. Fall on me like a silent dew, Or like those maiden showers Which, by the peep of day, do strew A baptism o'er the flowers. Melt, melt my pains With thy soft strains; That, having ease me given, With full delight I leave this light, And take my flight For heaven. So long you did not sing or touch your lute, We knew 'twas flesh and blood that there sat mute. But when your playing and your voice came in, 'Twas no more you then, but a cherubin. As lately I a garland bound, 'Mongst roses I there Cupid found; I took him, put him in my cup, And drunk with wine, I drank him up. Hence then it is that my poor breast Could never since find any rest. Display thy breasts, my Julia there let me Behold that circummortal purity, Between whose glories there my lips I'll lay, Ravish'd in that fair via lactea . Circummortal , more than mortal. Fools are they who never know How the times away do go; But for us, who wisely see Where the bounds of black death be, Let's live merrily, and thus Be not proud, but now incline Your soft ear to discipline. You have changes in your life Sometimes peace and sometimes strife; You have ebbs of face and flows, As your health or comes or goes; You have hopes, and doubts, and fears Numberless, as are your hairs. You have pulses that do beat High, and passions less of heat. You are young, but must be old, And, to these, ye must be told Time ere long will come and plough Loathed furrows in your brow: And the dimness of your eye Will no other thing imply But you must die As well as I. Art quickens nature; care will make a face; Neglected beauty perisheth apace. Mop-eyed I am, as some have said, Because I've lived so long a maid: But grant that I should wedded be, Should I a jot the better see? No, I should think that marriage might, Rather than mend, put out the light. Thou cam'st to cure me, doctor, of my cold, And caught'st thyself the more by twenty fold: Prithee go home; and for thy credit be First cured thyself, then come and cure me. Go, happy rose, and interwove With other flowers, bind my love. Tell her, too, she must not be Longer flowing, longer free, That so oft has fetter'd me. Say, if she's fretful, I have bands Of pearl and gold to bind her hands. Tell her, if she struggle still, I have myrtle rods at will For to tame, though not to kill. Take thou my blessing, thus, and go And tell her this, but do not so, Lest a handsome anger fly, Like a lightning, from her eye, And burn thee up as well as I. Thou art a plant sprung up to wither never, But like a laurel to grow green for ever. Men say y'are fair, and fair ye are, 'tis true; But, hark! we praise the painter now, not you. At draw-gloves we'll play, And prithee let's lay A wager, and let it be this: Who first to the sum Of twenty shall come, Shall have for his winning a kiss. Charms, that call down the moon from out her sphere, On this sick youth work your enchantments here: Bind up his senses with your numbers so As to entrance his pain, or cure his woe. Fall gently, gently, and a while him keep Lost in the civil wilderness of sleep: That done, then let him, dispossessed of pain, Like to a slumb'ring bride, awake again. Never my book's perfection did appear Till I had got the name of Villars here: Now 'tis so full that when therein I look I see a cloud of glory fills my book. Here stand it still to dignify our Muse, Your sober handmaid, who doth wisely choose Your name to be a laureate wreath to her Who doth both love and fear you, honoured sir. Love, I recant, And pardon crave That lately I offended; But 'twas, To make a brave, But no disdain intended. No more I'll vaunt, For now I see Thou only hast the power To find And bind A heart that's free, And slave it in an hour. So good luck came, and on my roof did light, Like noiseless snow, or as the dew of night: Not all at once, but gently, as the trees Are by the sunbeams tickled by degrees. Fly to my mistress, pretty pilfering bee, And say thou bring'st this honey bag from me: When on her lip thou hast thy sweet dew placed, Mark if her tongue but slyly steal a taste. If so, we live; if not, with mournful hum Toll forth my death; next, to my burial come. Love bade me ask a gift, And I no more did move But this, that I might shift Still with my clothes my love: That favour granted was; Since which, though I love many, Yet so it comes to pass That long I love not any. Come, sons of summer, by whose toil We are the lords of wine and oil: By whose tough labours and rough hands We rip up first, then reap our lands. Crowned with the ears of corn, now come, And to the pipe sing harvest home. Come forth, my lord, and see the cart Dressed up with all the country art: See here a maukin, there a sheet, As spotless pure as it is sweet: The horses, mares, and frisking fillies, Clad all in linen white as lilies. The harvest swains and wenches bound For joy, to see the hock-cart crowned. About the cart, hear how the rout Of rural younglings raise the shout; Pressing before, some coming after, Those with a shout, and these with laughter. Some bless the cart, some kiss the sheaves, Some prank them up with oaken leaves: Some cross the fill-horse, some with great Devotion stroke the home-borne wheat: While other rustics, less attent To prayers than to merriment, Run after with their breeches rent. Well, on, brave boys, to your lord's hearth, Glitt'ring with fire, where, for your mirth, Ye shall see first the large and chief Foundation of your feast, fat beef: With upper stories, mutton, veal And bacon which makes full the meal , With sev'ral dishes standing by, And here all-tempting frumenty. And for to make the merry cheer, If smirking wine be wanting here, There's that which drowns all care, stout beer; Which freely drink to your lord's health, Then to the plough, the commonwealth, Next to your flails, your fans, your fats, Then to the maids with wheaten hats: To the rough sickle, and crook'd scythe, Drink, frolic boys, till all be blithe. Feed, and grow fat; and as ye eat Be mindful that the lab'ring neat, As you, may have their fill of meat. And know, besides, ye must revoke The patient ox unto the yoke, And all go back unto the plough And harrow, though they're hanged up now. And, you must know, your lord's word's true, Feed him ye must, whose food fills you; And that this pleasure is like rain, Not sent ye for to drown your pain, But for to make it spring again. To-morrow, Julia, I betimes must rise, For some small fault to offer sacrifice: The altar's ready: fire to consume The fat; breathe thou, and there's the rich perfume. Let but thy voice engender with the string, And angels will be born while thou dost sing. He that will not love must be My scholar, and learn this of me: There be in love as many fears As the summer's corn has ears: Sighs, and sobs, and sorrows more Than the sand that makes the shore: Freezing cold and fiery heats, Fainting swoons and deadly sweats; Now an ague, then a fever, Both tormenting lovers ever. Would'st thou know, besides all these, How hard a woman 'tis to please, How cross, how sullen, and how soon She shifts and changes like the moon. How false, how hollow she's in heart: And how she is her own least part: How high she's priz'd, and worth but small; Little thou'lt love, or not at all. Music, thou queen of heaven, care-charming spell, That strik'st a stillness into hell: Thou that tam'st tigers, and fierce storms that rise, With thy soul-melting lullabies, Fall down, down, down from those thy chiming spheres, To charm our souls, as thou enchant'st our ears. Sweet western wind, whose luck it is, Made rival with the air, To give Perenna's lip a kiss, And fan her wanton hair. Bring me but one, I'll promise thee, Instead of common showers, Thy wings shall be embalm'd by me, And all beset with flowers. Why do not all fresh maids appear To work love's sampler only here, Where spring-time smiles throughout the year? Are not here rosebuds, pinks, all flowers Nature begets by th' sun and showers, Met in one hearse-cloth to o'erspread The body of the under-dead? Phil, the late dead, the late dead dear, O! may no eye distil a tear For you once lost, who weep not here! Had Lesbia, too-too kind, but known This sparrow, she had scorn'd her own: And for this dead which under lies Wept out her heart, as well as eyes. But, endless peace, sit here and keep My Phil the time he has to sleep; And thousand virgins come and weep To make these flowery carpets show Fresh as their blood, and ever grow, Till passengers shall spend their doom: Not Virgil's gnat had such a tomb. Why do ye weep, sweet babes? can tears Speak grief in you, Who were but born Just as the modest morn Teem'd her refreshing dew? Alas! you have not known that shower That mars a flower, Nor felt th' unkind Breath of a blasting wind, Nor are ye worn with years, Or warp'd as we, Who think it strange to see Such pretty flowers, like to orphans young, To speak by tears before ye have a tongue. Speak, whimp'ring younglings, and make known The reason why Ye droop and weep; Is it for want of sleep? Or childish lullaby? Or that ye have not seen as yet The violet? Or brought a kiss From that sweetheart to this? No, no, this sorrow shown By your tears shed Would have this lecture read: That things of greatest, so of meanest worth, Conceiv'd with grief are, and with tears brought forth. Roses at first were white, Till they could not agree, Whether my Sappho's breast Or they more white should be. But, being vanquish'd quite, A blush their cheeks bespread; Since which, believe the rest, The roses first came red. Dry your sweet cheek, long drown'd with sorrow's rain, Since, clouds dispers'd, suns gild the air again. Seas chafe and fret, and beat, and overboil, But turn soon after calm as balm or oil. Winds have their time to rage; but when they cease The leafy trees nod in a still-born peace. Your storm is over; lady, now appear Like to the peeping springtime of the year. Off then with grave clothes; put fresh colours on, And flow and flame in your vermilion. Upon your cheek sat icicles awhile; Now let the rose reign like a queen, and smile. Love on a day, wise poets tell, Some time in wrangling spent, Whether the violets should excel, Or she, in sweetest scent. But Venus having lost the day, Poor girls, she fell on you: And beat ye so, as some dare say, Her blows did make ye blue. Thou art to all lost love the best, The only true plant found, Wherewith young men and maids distres't, And left of love, are crown'd. When once the lover's rose is dead, Or laid aside forlorn: Then willow-garlands 'bout the head Bedew'd with tears are worn. When with neglect, the lovers' bane, Poor maids rewarded be, For their love lost, their only gain Is but a wreath from thee. And underneath thy cooling shade, When weary of the light, The love-spent youth and love-sick maid Come to weep out the night. Among the myrtles as I walk'd, Love and my sighs thus intertalk'd: Tell me, said I, in deep distress, Where I may find my shepherdess. Thou fool, said Love, know'st thou not this? In everything that's sweet she is. In yond' carnation go and seek, There thou shalt find her lip and cheek: In that enamell'd pansy by, There thou shalt have her curious eye: In bloom of peach and rose's bud, There waves the streamer of her blood. 'Tis true, said I, and thereupon I went to pluck them one by one, To make of parts a union: But on a sudden all were gone. At which I stopp'd; said Love, these be The true resemblances of thee; For, as these flowers, thy joys must die, And in the turning of an eye: And all thy hopes of her must wither, Like those short sweets, ere knit together. If when these lyrics, Csar, you shall hear, And that Apollo shall so touch your ear As for to make this, that, or any one, Number your own, by free adoption; That verse, of all the verses here, shall be The heir to this great realm of poetry . Goddess of youth, and lady of the spring, Most fit to be the consort to a king , Be pleas'd to rest you in this sacred grove Beset with myrtles, whose each leaf drops love. Many a sweet-fac'd wood-nymph here is seen, Of which chaste order you are now the queen: Witness their homage when they come and strew Your walks with flowers, and give their crowns to you. Your leafy throne, with lily-work possess, And be both princess here and poetess. May his pretty dukeship grow Like t'a rose of Jericho: Sweeter far than ever yet Showers or sunshines could beget. Strew his hopes and him with flowers: And so dress him up with love As to be the chick of Jove. May the thrice-three sisters sing Him the sovereign of their spring: And entitle none to be May his soft foot, where it treads, Gardens thence produce and meads: And those meadows full be set With the rose and violet. May his ample name be known To the last succession: And his actions high be told Through the world, but writ in gold. Bid me to live, and I will live Or bid me love, and I will give A loving heart to thee. A heart as soft, a heart as kind, A heart as sound and free As in the whole world thou canst find, That heart I'll give to thee. Bid that heart stay, and it will stay To honour thy decree: Or bid it languish quite away, And't shall do so for thee. Bid me to weep, and I will weep While I have eyes to see: And, having none, yet I will keep A heart to weep for thee. Bid me despair, and I'll despair Under that cypress-tree: Or bid me die, and I will dare E'en death to die for thee. Thou art my life, my love, my heart, The very eyes of me: And hast command of every part To live and die for thee. That prince takes soon enough the victor's room Who first provides not to be overcome. The gods to kings the judgment give to sway: The subjects only glory to obey. He that may sin, sins least: leave to transgress Enfeebles much the seeds of wickedness. That morn which saw me made a bride, The evening witness'd that I died. Those holy lights, wherewith they guide Unto the bed the bashful bride, Serv'd but as tapers for to burn And light my relics to their urn. This epitaph, which here you see, Supplied the epithalamy. Ye have been fresh and green, Ye have been fill'd with flowers, And ye the walks have been Where maids have spent their hours. You have beheld how they With wicker arks did come To kiss and bear away The richer cowslips home. Y'ave heard them sweetly sing, And seen them in a round: Each virgin like a spring, With honeysuckles crown'd. But now we see none here Whose silvery feet did tread, And with dishevell'd hair Adorn'd this smoother mead. Like unthrifts, having spent Your stock and needy grown, Y'are left here to lament Your poor estates, alone. Though good things answer many good intents, Crosses do still bring forth the best events . Though hourly comforts from the gods we see, No life is yet life-proof from misery . Rise, household gods, and let us go; But whither I myself not know. First, let us dwell on rudest seas; Next, with severest savages; Last, let us make our best abode Where human foot as yet ne'er trod: Search worlds of ice, and rather there Dwell than in loathed Devonshire. When I departed am, ring thou my knell, Thou pitiful and pretty Philomel: And when I'm laid out for a corse, then be Thou sexton, redbreast, for to cover me. Both you two have Relation to the grave: And where The funeral-trump sounds, you are there, I shall be made, Ere long, a fleeting shade: Pray, come And do some honour to my tomb. Do not deny My last request; for I Thankful to you, or friends, for me. I call, I call: who do ye call? The maids to catch this cowslip ball: But since these cowslips fading be, Troth, leave the flowers, and, maids, take me. Yet, if that neither you will do, Speak but the word and I'll take you. You say you're sweet; how should we know Whether that you be sweet or no? From powders and perfumes keep free, Then we shall smell how sweet you be. What's that we see from far? the spring of day Blown out of April, or some new Star filled with glory to our view, Reaching at heaven, To add a nobler planet to the seven? Say, or do we not descry Some goddess in a cloud of tiffany To move, or rather the Emergent Venus from the sea? 'Tis she! 'tis she! or else some more divine Enlightened substance; mark how from the shrine Of holy saints she paces on, Treading upon vermilion And amber: spic- ing the chaft air with fumes of Paradise. Then come on, come on and yield A savour like unto a blessed field When the bedabbled morn Washes the golden ears of corn. See where she comes; and smell how all the street Breathes vineyards and pomegranates: O how sweet! As a fir'd altar is each stone, Perspiring pounded cinnamon. The phnix' nest, Built up of odours, burneth in her breast. Who, therein, would not consume His soul to ash-heaps in that rich perfume? Bestroking fate the while He burns to embers on the pile. Hymen, O Hymen! tread the sacred ground; Show thy white feet and head with marjoram crown'd: Mount up thy flames and let thy torch Display the bridegroom in the porch, In his desires More towering, more disparkling than thy fires: Show her how his eyes do turn And roll about, and in their motions burn Their balls to cinders: haste Or else to ashes he will waste. Glide by the banks of virgins, then, and pass The showers of roses, lucky four-leav'd grass: The while the cloud of younglings sing And drown ye with a flowery spring; While some repeat Your praise and bless you, sprinkling you with wheat; While that others do divine, Bless'd is the bride on whom the sun doth shine ; And thousands gladly wish You multiply as doth a fish. And, beauteous bride, we do confess y'are wise In dealing forth these bashful jealousies: In love's name do so; and a price Set on yourself by being nice: But yet take heed; What now you seem be not the same indeed, And turn apostate: love will, Part of the way be met or sit stone-still. On, then, and though you slow- ly go, yet, howsoever, go. And now y'are entered; see the coddled cook Runs from his torrid zone to pry and look And bless his dainty mistress: see The aged point out, This is she Who now must sway The house love shield her with her yea and nay: And the smirk butler thinks it Sin in's napery not to express his wit; Each striving to devise Some gin wherewith to catch your eyes. To bed, to bed, kind turtles, now, and write This the short'st day, and this the longest night; But yet too short for you: 'tis we Who count this night as long as three, Lying alone, Telling the clock strike ten, eleven, twelve, one. Quickly, quickly then prepare, And let the young men and the bride-maids share Your garters; and their joints Encircle with the bridegroom's points. By the bride's eyes, and by the teeming life Of her green hopes, we charge ye that no strife Farther than gentleness tends gets place Among ye, striving for her lace: O do not fall Foul in these noble pastimes, lest ye call Discord in, and so divide The youthful bridegroom and the fragrant bride: Which love forfend; but spoken Be't to your praise, no peace was broken. Strip her of springtime, tender-whimpering maids, Now autumn's come, when all these flowery aids Of her delays must end; dispose That lady-smock, that pansy, and that rose Neatly apart, But for prick-madam and for gentle-heart, And soft maidens'-blush, the bride Makes holy these, all others lay aside: Then strip her, or unto her Let him come who dares undo her. And to enchant ye more, see everywhere About the roof a siren in a sphere, As we think, singing to the din Of many a warbling cherubin. O mark ye how The soul of nature melts in numbers: now See, a thousand Cupids fly To light their tapers at the bride's bright eye. To bed, or her they'll tire, Were she an element of fire. And to your more bewitching, see, the proud Plump bed bear up, and swelling like a cloud, Tempting the two too modest; can Ye see it brusle like a swan, And you be cold To meet it when it woos and seems to fold The arms to hug it? Throw, throw Yourselves into the mighty overflow Of that white pride, and drown The night with you in floods of down. The bed is ready, and the maze of love Looks for the treaders; everywhere is wove Wit and new mystery; read, and Put in practice, to understand And know each wile, Each hieroglyphic of a kiss or smile; And do it to the full; reach High in your own conceit, and some way teach Nature and art one more Play than they ever knew before. If needs we must for ceremony's sake, Bless a sack-posset, luck go with it, take The night-charm quickly, you have spells And magics for to end, and hells To pass; but such And of such torture as no one would grutch To live therein for ever: fry And consume, and grow again to die And live, and, in that case, Love the confusion of the place. But since it must be done, despatch, and sew Up in a sheet your bride, and what if so It be with rock or walls of brass Ye tower her up, as Danae was; Think you that this Or hell itself a powerful bulwark is? I tell ye no; but like a Bold bolt of thunder he will make his way, And rend the cloud, and throw The sheet about like flakes of snow. All now is hushed in silence: midwife-moon With all her owl-eyed issue begs a boon, Which you must grant; that's entrance; with Which extract, all we can call pith And quintessence Of planetary bodies, so commence, All fair constellations Looking upon ye, that two nations, Springing from two such fires May blaze the virtue of their sires. For sport my Julia threw a lace Of silk and silver at my face: Watchet the silk was, and did make A show as if't had been a snake: The suddenness did me afright, But though it scar'd, it did not bite. I am sieve-like, and can hold Nothing hot or nothing cold. Put in love, and put in too Jealousy, and both will through: Put in fear, and hope, and doubt; What comes in runs quickly out: Put in secrecies withal, Whate'er enters, out it shall: But if you can stop the sieve, For mine own part, I'd as lief Maids should say or virgins sing, Herrick keeps, as holds nothing. Love's a thing, as I do hear, Ever full of pensive fear; Rather than to which I'll fall, Trust me, I'll not like at all. If to love I should intend, Let my hair then stand an end: And that terror likewise prove Fatal to me in my love. But if horror cannot slake Flames which would an entrance make Then the next thing I desire Is, to love and live i' th' fire. An end , on end. Like to the income must be our expense; Man's fortune must be had in reverence . Who forms a godhead out of gold or stone Makes not a god, but he that prays to one. I could wish you all who love, That ye could your thoughts remove From your mistresses, and be Wisely wanton, like to me, I could wish you dispossessed Of that fiend that mars your rest , And with tapers comes to fright Your weak senses in the night. I could wish ye all who fry Cold as ice, or cool as I; But if flames best like ye, then, Much good do 't ye, gentlemen. I a merry heart will keep, While you wring your hands and weep. 'Tis a known principle in war, The eyes be first that conquered are. No fault in women to refuse The offer which they most would choose. No fault in women to confess How tedious they are in their dress. No fault in women to lay on The tincture of vermilion: And there to give the cheek a dye Of white, where nature doth deny. No fault in women to make show Of largeness when they're nothing so: When true it is the outside swells With inward buckram, little else . No fault in women, though they be But seldom from suspicion free. No fault in womankind at all If they but slip and never fall. Shapcot! to thee the fairy state I, with discretion, dedicate. Because thou prizest things that are Curious and unfamiliar. Take first the feast; these dishes gone, We'll see the Fairy Court anon. A little mushroom table spread, After short prayers, they set on bread; A moon-parch'd grain of purest wheat, With some small glittering grit to eat His choice bits with; then in a trice They make a feast less great than nice. But all this while his eye is serv'd, We must not think his ear was sterv'd; But that there was in place to stir His spleen, the chirring grasshopper, The merry cricket, puling fly, The piping gnat for minstrelsy. And now we must imagine first, The elves present, to quench his thirst, A pure seed-pearl of infant dew Brought and besweetened in a blue And pregnant violet, which done, His kitling eyes begin to run Quite through the table, where he spies The horns of papery butterflies: Of which he eats, and tastes a little Of that we call the cuckoo's spittle. A little fuzz-ball pudding stands By, yet not blessed by his hands; That was too coarse: but then forthwith He ventures boldly on the pith Of sugar'd rush, and eats the sagg And well-bestrutted bee's sweet bag: Gladding his palate with some store Of emmets' eggs; what would he more? But beards of mice, a newt's stewed thigh, A bloated earwig and a fly; With the red-capp'd worm that's shut Within the concave of a nut, Brown as his tooth. A little moth Late fatten'd in a piece of cloth: With withered cherries, mandrakes' ears, Moles' eyes; to these the slain stag's tears The unctuous dewlaps of a snail, The broke-heart of a nightingale O'ercome in music; with a wine Ne'er ravish'd from the flattering vine, But gently press'd from the soft side Of the most sweet and dainty bride, Brought in a dainty daisy, which He fully quaffs up to bewitch His blood to height; this done, commended Grace by his priest; the feast is ended . By time and counsel do the best we can, Th' event is never in the power of man. When Julia blushes she does show Cheeks like to roses when they blow. Our honours and our commendations be Due to the merits, not authority. Hear, ye virgins, and I'll teach What the times of old did preach. Rosamond was in a bower Kept, as Danae in a tower: But yet Love, who subtle is, Crept to that, and came to this. Be ye lock'd up like to these, Or the rich Hesperides, Or those babies in your eyes, In their crystal nunneries; Notwithstanding Love will win, Or else force a passage in: And as coy be as you can, Gifts will get ye, or the man. Each must in virtue strive for to excel; That man lives twice that lives the first life well . From noise of scare-fires rest ye free, From murders Benedicite . From all mischances that may fright Your pleasing slumbers in the night, Mercy secure ye all, and keep The goblin from ye while ye sleep. Past one o'clock, and almost two! My masters all, good-day to you. Of all our parts, the eyes express The sweetest kind of bashfulness. For one so rarely tun'd to fit all parts, For one to whom espous'd are all the arts, Long have I sought for, but could never see Them all concentr'd in one man, but thee. Thus, thou that man art whom the fates conspir'd To make but one, and that's thyself, admir'd. Prue, my dearest maid, is sick, sculapius! come and bring Means for her recovering; And a gallant cock shall be Offer'd up by her to thee. Phbus! when that I a verse Or some numbers more rehearse, Tune my words that they may fall Each way smoothly musical: For which favour there shall be Swans devoted unto thee. Bacchus, let me drink no more; Wild are seas that want a shore. When our drinking has no stint, There is no one pleasure in't. I have drank up, for to please Thee, that great cup Hercules: Urge no more, and there shall be Daffodils given up to thee. Here down my wearied limbs I'll lay; My pilgrim's staff, my weed of gray, My palmer's hat, my scallop's shell, My cross, my cord, and all, farewell. For having now my journey done, Just at the setting of the sun, Here I have found a chamber fit, God and good friends be thanked for it, Where if I can a lodger be, A little while from tramplers free, At my up-rising next I shall, If not requite, yet thank ye all. Meanwhile, the holy-rood hence fright The fouler fiend and evil sprite From scaring you or yours this night. Good things that come of course, far less do please Than those which come by sweet contingencies. Dead falls the cause if once the hand be mute; But let that speak, the client gets the suit. If well thou hast begun, go on fore-right; It is the end that crowns us, not the fight . Here she lies, a pretty bud, Lately made of flesh and blood: Who as soon fell fast asleep As her little eyes did peep. Give her strewings, but not stir The earth that lightly covers her. 'Tis not the food, but the content That makes the table's merriment. Where trouble serves the board, we eat The platters there as soon as meat. A little pipkin with a bit Of mutton or of veal in it, Set on my table, trouble-free, More than a feast contenteth me. Welcome! but yet no entrance, till we bless First you, then you, and both for white success. Profane no porch, young man and maid, for fear Ye wrong the Threshold-god that keeps peace here: Please him, and then all good-luck will betide You, the brisk bridegroom, you, the dainty bride. Do all things sweetly, and in comely wise; Put on your garlands first, then sacrifice: That done, when both of you have seemly fed, We'll call on Night, to bring ye both to bed: Where, being laid, all fair signs looking on, Fish-like, increase then to a million; And millions of spring-times may ye have, Which spent, one death bring to ye both one grave. Blessings in abundance come To the bride and to her groom; May the bed and this short night Know the fulness of delight! Pleasures many here attend ye, And, ere long, a boy Love send ye Curled and comely, and so trim, Maids, in time, may ravish him. Thus a dew of graces fall On ye both; good-night to all. Fair daffodils, we weep to see You haste away so soon; As yet the early-rising sun Has not attain'd his noon. Stay, stay, Until the hasting day Has run But to the evensong; And, having prayed together, we Will go with you along. We have short time to stay, as you, We have as short a spring; As quick a growth to meet decay, As you, or anything. We die, As your hours do, and dry Like to the summer's rain; Or as the pearls of morning's dew, Ne'er to be found again. As gilliflowers do but stay To blow, and seed, and so away; So you, sweet lady, sweet as May, The garden's glory, lived a while To lend the world your scent and smile. But when your own fair print was set Once in a virgin flosculet, Sweet as yourself, and newly blown, To give that life, resigned your own: But so as still the mother's power Lives in the pretty lady-flower. No news of navies burnt at seas; No closet plot, or open vent, That frights men with a parliament; No new device or late-found trick To read by the stars the kingdom's sick; No gin to catch the state, or wring The freeborn nostril of the king, We send to you; but here a jolly Verse, crown'd with ivy and with holly, That tells of winter's tales and mirth, That milkmaids make about the hearth, Of Christmas sports, the wassail-bowl, Of blind-man-buff, and of the care That young men have to shoe the mare; Of Twelfth-tide cakes, of peas and beans, Wherewith you make those merry scenes, Whenas ye choose your king and queen, And cry out: Hey, for our town green ; Of ash-heaps, in the which ye use Husbands and wives by streaks to choose; Of crackling laurel, which fore-sounds A plenteous harvest to your grounds: Of these and such-like things for shift, We send instead of New-Year's gift. Read then, and when your faces shine With buxom meat and cap'ring wine, Remember us in cups full crown'd, And let our city-health go round, Quite through the young maids and the men, To the ninth number, if not ten; Until the fired chesnuts leap For joy to see the fruits ye reap From the plump chalice and the cup, That tempts till it be tossed up; Then as ye sit about your embers, Call not to mind those fled Decembers, But think on these that are t' appear As daughters to the instant year: Sit crown'd with rosebuds, and carouse Till Liber Pater twirls the house About your ears; and lay upon The year your cares that's fled and gone. And let the russet swains the plough And harrow hang up, resting now; And to the bagpipe all address, Till sleep takes place of weariness. And thus, throughout, with Christmas plays Frolic the full twelve holidays. When with the virgin morning thou dost rise, Crossing thyself, come thus to sacrifice; First wash thy heart in innocence, then bring Pure hands, pure habits, pure, pure everything. Next to the altar humbly kneel, and thence Give up thy soul in clouds of frankincense. Thy golden censers, fill'd with odours sweet, Shall make thy actions with their ends to meet. Begin with Jove; then is the work half done, And runs most smoothly when 'tis well begun. Jove's is the first and last: the morn's his due, The midst is thine; but Jove's the evening too; As sure a matins does to him belong, So sure he lays claim to the evensong. Why I tie about thy wrist, Julia, this my silken twist; For what other reason is't, But to show thee how, in part, Thou my pretty captive art? But thy bondslave is my heart; 'Tis but silk that bindeth thee, Knap the thread and thou art free: But 'tis otherwise with me; I am bound, and fast bound, so That from thee I cannot go; If I could, I would not so. A man prepar'd against all ills to come, That dares to dead the fire of martyrdom; That sleeps at home, and sailing there at ease, Fears not the fierce sedition of the seas; That's counter-proof against the farm's mishaps, Undreadful too of courtly thunderclaps; That wears one face, like heaven, and never shows A change when fortune either comes or goes; That keeps his own strong guard in the despite Of what can hurt by day or harm by night; That takes and re-delivers every stroke Of chance as made up all of rock and oak ; That sighs at others' death, smiles at his own Most dire and horrid crucifixion. Who for true glory suffers thus, we grant Him to be here our Christian militant. Though I cannot give thee fires Glittering to my free desires; These accept, and I'll be free, Offering poppy unto thee. Mighty Neptune, may it please Thee, the rector of the seas, That my barque may safely run Through thy watery region; And a tunny-fish shall be Offered up with thanks to thee. For my embalming, Julia, do but this; Give thou my lips but their supremest kiss, Or else transfuse thy breath into the chest Where my small relics must for ever rest; That breath the balm, the myrrh, the nard shall be, To give an incorruption unto me. How rich a man is all desire to know; But none inquires if good he be or no. What is the thing we call a kiss? It is a creature born and bred Between the lips all cherry-red , By love and warm desires fed. And makes more soft the bridal bed. First, to the babies of the eyes; And charms them there with lullabies. And stills the bride, too, when she cries. It frisks and flies, now here, now there, 'Tis now far off, and then 'tis near. And here and there and everywhere. Part your joined lips, then speaks your kiss And this love's sweetest language is. With thousand rare encolourings; And, as it flies, it gently sings, Love honey yields, but never stings. Seest thou those diamonds which she wears In that rich carcanet; Or those, on her dishevell'd hairs, Fair pearls in order set? Believe, young man, all those were tears By wretched wooers sent, In mournful hyacinths and rue, That figure discontent; Which when not warmed by her view, By cold neglect, each one Congeal'd to pearl and stone; Which precious spoils upon her She wears as trophies of her honour. Ah then, consider, what all this implies: She that will wear thy tears would wear thine eyes. I can but name thee, and methinks I call All that have been, or are canonical For love and bounty to come near, and see Their many virtues volum'd up in thee; In thee, brave man! whose incorrupted fame Casts forth a light like to a virgin flame; And as it shines it throws a scent about, As when a rainbow in perfumes goes out. So vanish hence, but leave a name as sweet As benjamin and storax when they meet. Ask me why I do not sing To the tension of the string As I did not long ago, When my numbers full did flow? Grief, ay, me! hath struck my lute And my tongue, at one time, mute. No more shall I, since I am driven hence, Devote to thee my grains of frankincense; No more shall I from mantle-trees hang down, To honour thee, my little parsley crown; No more shall I I fear me to thee bring My chives of garlic for an offering; No more shall I from henceforth hear a choir Of merry crickets by my country fire. Go where I will, thou lucky Lar stay here, Warm by a glitt'ring chimney all the year. What can I do in poetry Now the good spirit's gone from me? Why, nothing now but lonely sit And over-read what I have writ. For punishment in war it will suffice If the chief author of the faction dies; Let but few smart, but strike a fear through all; Where the fault springs there let the judgment fall. Ah Posthumus! our years hence fly, And leave no sound; nor piety, Or prayers, or vow Can keep the wrinkle from the brow; But we must on, As fate does lead or draw us; none, None, Posthumus, could ere decline The doom of cruel Proserpine. The pleasing wife, the house, the ground, Must all be left, no one plant found To follow thee, Save only the curs'd cypress tree; A merry mind Looks forward, scorns what's left behind; Let's live, my Wickes, then, while we may, And here enjoy our holiday. W'ave seen the past best times, and these Will ne'er return; we see the seas And moons to wane But they fill up their ebbs again; But vanish'd man, Like to a lily lost, ne'er can, Ne'er can repullulate, or bring His days to see a second spring. But on we must, and thither tend, Where Anchus and rich Tullus blend Their sacred seed: Thus has infernal Jove decreed; We must be made, Ere long a song, ere long a shade. Why then, since life to us is short, Let's make it full up by our sport. Crown we our heads with roses then, And 'noint with Tyrian balm; for when We two are dead, The world with us is buried. Then live we free As is the air, and let us be Our own fair wind, and mark each one Day with the white and lucky stone. We are not poor, although we have No roofs of cedar, nor our brave Bai, nor keep Account of such a flock of sheep; Nor bullocks fed To lard the shambles: barbels bred To kiss our hands; nor do we wish For Pollio's lampreys in our dish. If we can meet and so confer Both by a shining salt-cellar, And have our roof, Although not arch'd, yet weather-proof, And ceiling free From that cheap candle bawdery; We'll eat our bean with that full mirth As we were lords of all the earth. Well then, on what seas we are toss'd, Our comfort is, we can't be lost. Let the winds drive Our barque, yet she will keep alive Amidst the deeps. 'Tis constancy, my Wickes, which keeps The pinnace up; which, though she errs I' th' seas, she saves her passengers. Say, we must part sweet mercy bless Us both i' th' sea, camp, wilderness , Can we so far Stray to become less circular Than we are now? No, no, that self-same heart, that vow Which made us one, shall ne'er undo, Or ravel so to make us two. Live in thy peace; as for myself, When I am bruised on the shelf Of time, and show My locks behung with frost and snow; When with the rheum, The cough, the ptisick, I consume Unto an almost nothing; then The ages fled I'll call again, And with a tear compare these last Lame and bad times with those are past; My old lean wife, shall kiss it dry. And so we'll sit By th' fire, foretelling snow and sleet, And weather by our aches, grown Now old enough to be our own True calendars, as puss's ear Washed o'er's, to tell what change is near: Then to assuage The gripings of the chine by age, I'll call my young Ilus to sing such a song I made upon my Julia's breast; And of her blush at such a feast. Then shall he read that flower of mine, Enclos'd within a crystal shrine; A primrose next; A piece, then, of a higher text, For to beget In me a more transcendent heat Than that insinuating fire, Which crept into each aged sire, When the fair Helen, from her eyes, Shot forth her loving sorceries; At which I'll rear Mine aged limbs above my chair, And, hearing it, Flutter and crow as in a fit Of fresh concupiscence, and cry: No lust there's like to poetry . I'll call to mind things half-forgot, And oft between Repeat the times that I have seen! Thus ripe with tears, And twisting my Ilus' hairs, Doting, I'll weep and say, in truth, Baucis, these were my sins of youth. Then next I'll cause my hopeful lad, If a wild apple can be had, To crown the hearth, Lar thus conspiring with our mirth; Then to infuse Our browner ale into the cruse, Which sweetly spic'd, we'll first carouse Unto the Genius of the house. Then the next health to friends of mine, Loving the brave Burgundian wine, High sons of pith, Whose fortunes I have frolicked with; Such as could well Bear up the magic bough and spell; And dancing 'bout the mystic thyrse, Give up the just applause to verse: To those, and then again to thee, We'll drink, my Wickes, until we be Plump as the cherry, Though not so fresh, yet full as merry As the cricket, The untam'd heifer, or the pricket, Until our tongues shall tell our ears We're younger by a score of years. Thus, till we see the fire less shine From th' embers than the kitling's eyne, We'll still sit up, Sphering about the wassail-cup To all those times Which gave me honour for my rhymes. The coal once spent, we'll then to bed, Far more than night-bewearied. Goddess, I do love a girl, Ruby-lipp'd and tooth'd with pearl; If so be I may but prove Lucky in this maid I love, I will promise there shall be Myrtles offer'd up to thee. True to yourself and sheets, you'll have me swear; You shall, if righteous dealing I find there. Do not you fall through frailty; I'll be sure To keep my bond still free from forfeiture. Two parts of us successively command: The tongue in peace; but then in war the hand. Come, come away, Or let me go; Must I here stay Because y'are slow, And will continue so? Troth, lady, no. I scorn to be A slave to state: And, since I'm free, I will not wait Henceforth at such a rate For needy fate. If you desire My spark should glow, The peeping fire You must blow, Or I shall quickly grow To frost or snow. When I of Villars do but hear the name, It calls to mind that mighty Buckingham, Who was your brave exalted uncle here, Binding the wheel of fortune to his sphere, Who spurned at envy, and could bring with ease An end to all his stately purposes. For his love then, whose sacred relics show Their resurrection and their growth in you; And for my sake, who ever did prefer You above all those sweets of Westminster; Permit my book to have a free access To kiss your hand, most dainty governess. Will ye hear what I can say Black and rolling is her eye, Double-chinn'd and forehead high; Lips she has all ruby red, Cheeks like cream enclareted; And a nose that is the grace And proscenium of her face. So that we may guess by these The other parts will richly please. In time of life I graced ye with my verse; Do now your flowery honours to my hearse. You shall not languish, trust me; virgins here Weeping shall make ye flourish all the year. Thou say'st my lines are hard, And I the truth will tell They are both hard and marr'd If thou not read'st them well. Let kings command and do the best they may, The saucy subjects still will bear the sway. Sea-born goddess, let me be By thy son thus grac'd and thee; That whene'er I woo, I find Virgins coy but not unkind. Let me when I kiss a maid Taste her lips so overlaid With love's syrup, that I may, In your temple when I pray, Kiss the altar and confess There's in love no bitterness. How am I ravish'd! when I do but see The painter's art in thy sciography? If so, how much more shall I dote thereon When once he gives it incarnation? See'st thou that cloud as silver clear, Plump, soft, and swelling everywhere? 'Tis Julia's bed, and she sleeps there. Fain would I kiss my Julia's dainty leg, Which is as white and hairless as an egg. See how the poor do waiting stand For the expansion of thy hand. A wafer dol'd by thee will swell Thousands to feed by miracle. Still to our gains our chief respect is had; Reward it is that makes us good or bad. Nothing is new; we walk where others went; There's no vice now but has his precedent. Look how the rainbow doth appear But in one only hemisphere; So likewise after our decease No more is seen the arch of peace. That cov'nant's here, the under-bow, That nothing shoots but war and woe. Come with the spring-time forth, fair maid, and be This year again the meadow's deity. Yet ere ye enter give us leave to set Upon your head this flowery coronet; To make this neat distinction from the rest, You are the prime and princess of the feast; To which with silver feet lead you the way, While sweet-breath nymphs attend on you this day. This is your hour, and best you may command, Since you are lady of this fairy land. Full mirth wait on you, and such mirth as shall Cherish the cheek but make none blush at all. Loth to depart, but yet at last each one Back must now go to's habitation; Not knowing thus much when we once do sever, Whether or no that we shall meet here ever. As for myself, since time a thousand cares And griefs hath filed upon my silver hairs, 'Tis to be doubted whether I next year Or no shall give ye a re-meeting here. If die I must, then my last vow shall be, You'll with a tear or two remember me. Your sometime poet; but if fates do give Me longer date and more fresh springs to live, Oft as your field shall her old age renew, Herrick shall make the meadow-verse for you. Judith has cast her old skin and got new, And walks fresh varnish'd to the public view; Foul Judith was and foul she will be known For all this fair transfiguration. How dull and dead are books that cannot show A prince of Pembroke, and that Pembroke you! You who are high born, and a lord no less Free by your fate than fortune's mightiness, Who hug our poems, honour'd sir, and then The paper gild and laureate the pen. Nor suffer you the poets to sit cold, But warm their wits and turn their lines to gold. Others there be who righteously will swear Those smooth-paced numbers amble everywhere, And these brave measures go a stately trot; Love those, like these, regard, reward them not. But you, my lord, are one whose hand along Goes with your mouth or does outrun your tongue; Paying before you praise, and, cockering wit, Give both the gold and garland unto it. Stately goddess, do thou please, Who are chief at marriages, But to dress the bridal bed When my love and I shall wed; And a peacock proud shall be Offered up by us to thee. When thou dost play and sweetly sing Whether it be the voice or string Or both of them that do agree Thus to entrance and ravish me This, this I know, I'm oft struck mute, And die away upon thy lute. Thou gav'st me leave to kiss, Thou gav'st me leave to woo; Thou mad'st me think, by this And that, thou lov'dst me too. But I shall ne'er forget How, for to make thee merry, Thou mad'st me chop, but yet Another snapp'd the cherry. I, who have favour'd many, come to be Grac'd now, at last, or glorified by thee, Lo! I, the lyric prophet, who have set On many a head the delphic coronet, Come unto thee for laurel, having spent My wreaths on those who little gave or lent. Give me the daphne, that the world may know it, Whom they neglected thou hast crown'd a poet. A city here of heroes I have made Upon the rock whose firm foundation laid, Shall never shrink; where, making thine abode, Live thou a Selden, that's a demi-god. Thou shalt not all die; for, while love's fire shines Upon his altar, men shall read thy lines, And learn'd musicians shall, to honour Herrick's Fame and his name, both set and sing his lyrics. Wrinkles no more are or no less Than beauty turned to sourness. First offer incense, then thy field and meads Shall smile and smell the better by thy beads. The spangling dew, dredg'd o'er the grass, shall be Turn'd all to mell and manna there for thee. Butter of amber, cream, and wine, and oil Shall run, as rivers, all throughout thy soil. Would'st thou to sincere silver turn thy mould? Pray once, twice pray, and turn thy ground to gold. Call me no more, As heretofore, The music of a feast; Since now, alas! The mirth that was In me is dead or ceas'd. Before I went, To banishment, Into the loathed west, I could rehearse A lyric verse, And speak it with the best. But time, ay me! Has laid, I see, My organ fast asleep, And turn'd my voice Into the noise Of those that sit and weep. So smell those odours that do rise From out the wealthy spiceries; So smells the flower of blooming clove, Or roses smother'd in the stove; So smells the air of spiced wine, Or essences of jessamine; So smells the breath about the hives When well the work of honey thrives, And all the busy factors come Laden with wax and honey home; So smell those neat and woven bowers All over-arch'd with orange flowers, And almond blossoms that do mix To make rich these aromatics; So smell those bracelets and those bands Of amber chaf'd between the hands, When thus enkindled they transpire A noble perfume from the fire; The wine of cherries, and to these The cooling breath of respasses; The smell of morning's milk and cream, Butter of cowslips mix'd with them; Of roasted warden or bak'd pear, These are not to be reckon'd here, Whenas the meanest part of her, Smells like the maiden pomander. Thus sweet she smells, or what can be More lik'd by her or lov'd by me. Sweet virgin, that I do not set The pillars up of weeping jet Or mournful marble, let thy shade Not wrathful seem, or fright the maid Who hither at her wonted hours Shall come to strew thy earth with flowers. No; know, bless'd maid, when there's not one Remainder left of brass or stone, Thy living epitaph shall be, Though lost in them, yet found in me; Dear, in thy bed of roses then, Till this world shall dissolve as men, Sleep while we hide thee from the light, Drawing thy curtains round: Good-night. Till I shall come again let this suffice, I send my salt, my sacrifice To thee, thy lady, younglings, and as far To the worn threshold, porch, hall, parlour, kitchen, The fat-fed smoking temple, which in The wholesome savour of thy mighty chines Invites to supper him who dines, Where laden spits, warp'd with large ribs of beef, Not represent but give relief To the lank stranger and the sour swain, Where both may feed and come again; For no black-bearded vigil from thy door Beats with a button'd-staff the poor; But from thy warm love-hatching gates each may Take friendly morsels and there stay To sun his thin-clad members if he likes, For thou no porter keep'st who strikes. No comer to thy roof his guest-rite wants, Or staying there is scourg'd with taunts Of some rough groom, who, yirkt with corns, says: Sir, Y'ave dipped too long i' th' vinegar; And with our broth, and bread, and bits, sir friend, Y'ave fared well: pray make an end; Two days y'ave larded here; a third, ye know, Makes guests and fish smell strong; pray go You to some other chimney, and there take Essay of other giblets; make Merry at another's hearth y'are here Welcome as thunder to our beer; Manners know distance, and a man unrude Would soon recoil and not intrude His stomach to a second meal. No, no! Thy house well fed and taught can show No such crabb'd vizard: thou hast learnt thy train With heart and hand to entertain, And by the armsful, with a breast unhid, As the old race of mankind did, When either's heart and either's hand did strive To be the nearer relative. Thou dost redeem those times, and what was lost Of ancient honesty may boast It keeps a growth in thee, and so will run A course in thy fame's pledge, thy son. Thus, like a Roman tribune, thou thy gate Early sets ope to feast and late; Keeping no currish waiter to affright With blasting eye the appetite, Which fain would waste upon thy cates, but that The trencher-creature marketh what Best and more suppling piece he cuts, and by Some private pinch tells danger's nigh A hand too desp'rate, or a knife that bites Skin-deep into the pork, or lights Upon some part of kid, as if mistook, When checked by the butler's look. No, no; thy bread, thy wine, thy jocund beer Is not reserved for Trebius here, But all who at thy table seated are Find equal freedom, equal fare; And thou, like to that hospitable god, Jove, joy'st when guests make their abode To eat thy bullock's thighs, thy veals, thy fat Wethers, and never grudged at. The cock , the curlew and the quail , These and thy choicest viands do extend Their taste unto the lower end Of thy glad table: not a dish more known To thee than unto anyone. But as thy meat so thy immortal wine Makes the smirk face of each to shine And spring fresh rosebuds, while the salt, the wit, Flows from the wine and graces it; While reverence, waiting at the bashful board, Honours my lady and my lord. No scurril jest; no open scene is laid Here for to make the face afraid; But temperate mirth dealt forth, and so discreet- ly that it makes the meat more sweet; And adds perfumes unto the wine, which thou Dost rather pour forth than allow By cruse and measure; thus devoting wine As the Canary Isles were thine; But with that wisdom and that method, as No one that's there his guilty glass Drinks of distemper, or has cause to cry Repentance to his liberty. No, thou knowest order, ethics, and has read All economics, know'st to lead A house-dance neatly, and canst truly show How far a figure ought to go, Forward or backward, sideward, and what pace Can give, and what retract a grace; What gesture, courtship, comeliness agrees With those thy primitive decrees, To give subsistence to thy house, and proof What Genii support thy roof, Goodness and Greatness; not the oaken piles; For these and marbles have their whiles To last, but not their ever ; virtue's hand It is which builds 'gainst fate to stand. Such is thy house, whose firm foundation's trust Is more in thee than in her dust Or depth; these last may yield and yearly shrink Or yawning rupture can the same devour, But fix'd it stands, by her own power And well-laid bottom, on the iron and rock Which tries and counter-stands the shock And ram of time, and by vexation grows The stronger; virtue dies when foes Are wanting to her exercise, but great And large she spreads by dust and sweat . Safe stand thy walls and thee, and so both will, Since neither's height was rais'd by th' ill Of others; since no stud, no stone, no piece Was rear'd up by the poor man's fleece; No widow's tenement was rack'd to gild Or fret thy ceiling or to build A sweating-closet to anoint the silk- soft skin, or bathe in asses' milk; No orphan's pittance left him serv'd to set The pillars up of lasting jet, For which their cries might beat against thine ears, Or in the damp jet read their tears. No plank from hallowed altar does appeal To yond' Star-Chamber, or does seal A curse to thee or thine; but all things even Make for thy peace and pace to heaven. Go on directly so, as just men may A thousand times more swear than say: This is that princely Pemberton who can Teach man to keep a god in man; And when wise poets shall search out to see Good men, they find them all in thee. Oft have I heard both youths and virgins say Birds choose their mates, and couple too this day; But by their flight I never can divine When I shall couple with my valentine. After the rare arch-poet, Jonson, died, The sock grew loathsome, and the buskin's pride, Together with the stage's glory, stood Each like a poor and pitied widowhood. The cirque profan'd was, and all postures rack'd; For men did strut, and stride, and stare, not act. Then temper flew from words, and men did squeak, Look red, and blow, and bluster, but not speak; No holy rage or frantic fires did stir Or flash about the spacious theatre. No clap of hands, or shout, or praise's proof Did crack the play-house sides, or cleave her roof. Artless the scene was, and that monstrous sin Of deep and arrant ignorance came in: Such ignorance as theirs was who once hiss'd At thy unequall'd play, the Alchemist ; Oh, fie upon 'em! Lastly, too, all wit In utter darkness did, and still will sit, Sleeping the luckless age out, till that she Her resurrection has again with thee. Thou had'st the wreath before, now take the tree, That henceforth none be laurel-crown'd but thee. On, as thou hast begun, brave youth, and get The palm from Urbin, Titian, Tintoret, Brugel and Coxu, and the works outdo Of Holbein and that mighty Rubens too. So draw and paint as none may do the like, Store of courage to me grant, Now I'm turn'd a combatant; Help me, so that I my shield, Fighting, lose not in the field. That's the greatest shame of all That in warfare can befall. Do but this, and there shall be Offer'd up a wolf to thee. These summer-birds did with thy master stay The times of warmth, but then they flew away, Leaving their poet, being now grown old, Expos'd to all the coming winter's cold. But thou, kind Prew, did'st with my fates abide As well the winter's as the summer's tide; For which thy love, live with thy master here, Not one, but all the seasons of the year. Play, Phbus, on thy lute; And we will all sit mute, By listening to thy lyre, That sets all ears on fire. Hark, hark, the god does play! And as he leads the way Through heaven the very spheres, As men, turn all to ears. A just man's like a rock that turns the wrath Of all the raging waves into a froth. Sing me to death; for till thy voice be clear, 'Twill never please the palate of mine ear. Frolic virgins once these were, Over-loving, living here; Being here their ends denied, Ran for sweethearts mad, and died. Love, in pity of their tears, And their loss in blooming years, For their restless here-spent hours, Gave them heart's-ease turn'd to flowers. Since, for thy full deserts, with all the rest Of these chaste spirits that are here possest Of life eternal, time has made thee one For growth in this my rich plantation, Live here; but know 'twas virtue, and not chance, That gave thee this so high inheritance. Keep it for ever, grounded with the good, Who hold fast here an endless livelihood. At my homely country-seat I have there a little wheat, Which I work to meal, and make Therewithal a holy cake: Part of which I give to Lar, Part is my peculiar. Man is compos'd here of a twofold part: The first of nature, and the next of art: Art presupposes nature; nature she Prepares the way for man's docility. Those ills that mortal men endure So long, are capable of cure, As they of freedom may be sure; But, that denied, a grief, though small, Shakes the whole roof, or ruins all. Learn this of me, where'er thy lot doth fall, Short lot or not, to be content with all. Jove may afford us thousands of reliefs, Since man expos'd is to a world of griefs. By dream I saw one of the three Sisters of fate appear to me; Close to my bedside she did stand, Showing me there a firebrand; She told me too, as that did spend, So drew my life unto an end. Three quarters were consum'd of it; Only remained a little bit, Which will be burnt up by-and-by; Then, Julia, weep, for I must die. Away with silks, away with lawn, I'll have no scenes or curtains drawn; Give me my mistress as she is, Dress'd in her nak'd simplicities; For as my heart e'en so mine eye Is won with flesh, not drapery. Show me thy feet; show me thy legs, thy thighs; Show me those fleshy principalities; Show me that hill where smiling love doth sit. Having a living fountain under it; Show me thy waist, then let me therewithal, By the assention of thy lawn, see all. When out of bed my love doth spring, 'Tis but as day a-kindling; But when she's up and fully dress'd, 'Tis then broad day throughout the east. Have I not blest thee? Then go forth, nor fear Or spice, or fish, or fire, or close-stools here. But with thy fair fates leading thee, go on With thy most white predestination. Nor think these ages that do hoarsely sing The farting tanner and familiar king, The dancing friar, tatter'd in the bush; Those monstrous lies of little Robin Rush, Tom Chipperfeild, and pretty lisping Ned, That doted on a maid of gingerbread; The flying pilchard and the frisking dace, With all the rabble of Tim Trundell's race Bred from the dunghills and adulterous rhymes , Shall live, and thou not superlast all times. No, no; thy stars have destin'd thee to see The whole world die and turn to dust with thee. Whenas a public ruin bears down all. I do not love, nor can it be Love will in vain spend shafts on me; I did this godhead once defy, Since which I freeze, but cannot fry. Yet out, alas! the death's the same, Kill'd by a frost or by a flame. I dislik'd but even now; Now I love I know not how. Was I idle, and that while Was I fir'd with a smile? I'll to work, or pray; and then I shall quite dislike again. Love he that will, it best likes me To have my neck from love's yoke free. Good-morrow to the day so fair, Good-morning, sir, to you; Good-morrow to mine own torn hair, Bedabbled with the dew. Good-morning to this primrose too, Good-morrow to each maid That will with flowers the tomb bestrew Wherein my love is laid. Ah! woe is me, woe, woe is me, Alack and well-a-day! For pity, sir, find out that bee Which bore my love away. I'll seek him in your bonnet brave, I'll seek him in your eyes; Nay, now I think th'ave made his grave I' th' bed of strawberries. I'll seek him there; I know ere this The cold, cold earth doth shake him; But I will go or send a kiss By you, sir, to awake him. Pray, hurt him not, though he be dead, He knows well who do love him, And who with green turfs rear his head, And who do rudely move him. He's soft and tender pray take heed ; With bands of cowslips bind him, And bring him home; but 'tis decreed That I shall never find him. I heard ye could cool heat, and came With hope you would allay the same; Thrice I have wash'd but feel no cold, Nor find that true which was foretold. Methinks, like mine, your pulses beat And labour with unequal heat; Cure, cure yourselves, for I descry Ye boil with love as well as I. Tell if thou canst, and truly, whence doth come This camphor, storax, spikenard, galbanum; These musks, these ambers, and those other smells, Sweet as the vestry of the oracles. I'll tell thee: while my Julia did unlace Her silken bodice but a breathing space, The passive air such odour then assum'd, As when to Jove great Juno goes perfum'd, Whose pure immortal body doth transmit A scent that fills both heaven and earth with it. Whither dost thou whorry me, Bacchus, being full of thee? This way, that way, that way, this, Here and there a fresh love is. That doth like me, this doth please, Thus a thousand mistresses I have now; yet I alone, Having all, enjoy not one. Would I see lawn, clear as the heaven, and thin? It should be only in my Julia's skin, Which so betrays her blood as we discover The blush of cherries when a lawn's cast over. When my off'ring next I make, Be thy hand the hallowed cake, And thy breast the altar whence Love may smell the frankincense. I'm sick of love, O let me lie Under your shades to sleep or die! Either is welcome, so I have Or here my bed, or here my grave. Why do you sigh, and sob, and keep Time with the tears that I do weep? Say, have ye sense, or do you prove What crucifixions are in love? I know ye do, and that's the why You sigh for love as well as I. The feast of shepherds fail. None crowns the cup Of wassail now or sets the quintell up; And he who us'd to lead the country-round, Youthful Mirtillo, here he comes grief-drown'd. Let's cheer him up. Behold him weeping-ripe. Ah! Amaryllis, farewell mirth and pipe; Since thou art gone, no more I mean to play To these smooth lawns my mirthful roundelay. Poor pitied youth! And here the breath of kine And sheep grew more sweet by that breath of thine. This flock of wool and this rich lock of hair, This ball of cowslips, these she gave me here. Words sweet as love itself. Montano, hark! This way she came, and this way too she went; How each thing smells divinely redolent! Like to a field of beans when newly blown, Or like a meadow being lately mown. In dewy mornings when she came this way Sweet bents would bow to give my love the day; And when at night she folded had her sheep, Daisies would shut, and, closing, sigh and weep. Besides ay me! since she went hence to dwell, The voices' daughter ne'er spake syllable. But she is gone. Mirtillo, tell us whither. Where she and I shall never meet together. Forfend it Pan, and, Pales, do thou please To give an end. To what? Such griefs as these. Never, O never! Still I may endure The wound I suffer, never find a cure. Love for thy sake will bring her to these hills And dales again. No, I will languish still; And all the while my part shall be to weep, And with my sighs, call home my bleating sheep: And in the rind of every comely tree I'll carve thy name, and in that name kiss thee. Set with the sun thy woes. The day grows old, And time it is our full-fed flocks to fold. The shades grow great, but greater grows our sorrow; But let's go steep Our eyes in sleep, And meet to weep To-morrow. I do not love to wed, Though I do like to woo; And for a maidenhead I'll beg and buy it too. I'll praise and I'll approve Those maids that never vary; And fervently I'll love, But yet I would not marry. I'll hug, I'll kiss, I'll play, And, cock-like, hens I'll tread, And sport it any way But in the bridal bed. For why? that man is poor Who hath but one of many, But crown'd he is with store That, single, may have any. Why then, say, what is he, To freedom so unknown, Who, having two or three, Will be content with one? A willow garland thou did'st send Perfum'd, last day, to me, Which did but only this portend I was forsook by thee. Since so it is, I'll tell thee what, To-morrow thou shalt see Me wear the willow; after that, To die upon the tree. As beasts unto the altars go With garlands dress'd, so I Will, with my willow-wreath, also Come forth and sweetly die. 'Twas not love's dart, Or any blow Of want, or foe, Did wound my heart With an eternal smart; But only you, My sometimes known My dearest Crew, That me unkindly slew. May your fault die, And have no name In books of fame; Or let it lie Forgotten now, as I. We parted are And now no more, As heretofore, By jocund Lar Shall be familiar. But though we sever, My Crew shall see That I will be Here faithless never, But love my Clipseby ever. Empires of kings are now, and ever were, As Sallust saith, coincident to fear. Every time seems short to be That's measured by felicity; But one half-hour that's made up here With grief, seems longer than a year. In holy meetings there a man may be One of the crowd, not of the company. That princes may possess a surer seat, 'Tis fit they make no one with them too great. Have ye beheld with much delight A red rose peeping through a white? Or else a cherry, double grac'd, Within a lily centre plac'd? Or ever mark'd the pretty beam A strawberry shows half-drown'd in cream? Or seen rich rubies blushing through A pure smooth pearl and orient too? So like to this, nay all the rest, Is each neat niplet of her breast. Shut not so soon; the dull-ey'd night Has not as yet begun To make a seizure on the light, Or to seal up the sun. No marigolds yet closed are, No shadows great appear; Nor doth the early shepherd's star Shine like a spangle here. Stay but till my Julia close Her life-begetting eye, And let the whole world then dispose Itself to live or die. Ye pretty housewives, would ye know The work that I would put ye to? This, this it should be: for to spin A lawn for me, so fine and thin As it might serve me for my skin. For cruel Love has me so whipp'd That of my skin I all am stripp'd: And shall despair that any art Can ease the rawness or the smart, Unless you skin again each part. Which mercy if you will but do, I call all maids to witness to What here I promise: that no broom Shall now or ever after come To wrong a spinner or her loom. After the feast, my Shapcot, see The fairy court I give to thee; Where we'll present our Oberon, led Half-tipsy to the fairy bed, Where Mab he finds, who there doth lie, Not without mickle majesty. Which done, and thence remov'd the light, We'll wish both them and thee good-night. Full as a bee with thyme, and red As cherry harvest, now high fed For lust and action, on he'll go To lie with Mab, though all say no. Lust has no ears; he's sharp as thorn, And fretful, carries hay in's horn, And lightning in his eyes; and flings Among the elves, if moved, the stings Of peltish wasps; well know his guard Kings, though they're hated, will be fear'd . Wine lead him on. Thus to a grove, Sometimes devoted unto love, Tinselled with twilight, he and they, Led by the shine of snails, a way Beat with their num'rous feet, which, by Many a neat perplexity, Many a turn and many a cross- Track they redeem a bank of moss, Spongy and swelling, and far more Soft than the finest Lemster ore, Mildly disparkling like those fires Of curious brides; or like those mites Of candi'd dew in moony nights. Upon this convex all the flowers Nature begets by th' sun and showers, Are to a wild digestion brought, As if love's sampler here was wrought: Or Citherea's ceston, which All with temptation doth bewitch. Sweet airs move here, and more divine Made by the breath of great-eyed kine, Who, as they low, impearl with milk The four-leaved grass or moss like silk. The breath of monkeys met to mix With musk-flies are th' aromatics Which 'cense this arch; and here and there And farther off, and everywhere Throughout that brave mosaic yard, Those picks or diamonds in the card Are here most neatly inter-laid Many a counter, many a die, Half-rotten and without an eye Lies hereabouts; and, for to pave The excellency of this cave, Squirrels' and children's teeth late shed Are neatly here enchequered With brownest toadstones, and the gum That shines upon the bluer plum. The nails fallen off by whitflaws: art's Wise hand enchasing here those warts Which we to others, from ourselves, Sell, and brought hither by the elves. The tempting mole, stolen from the neck Of the shy virgin, seems to deck The holy entrance, where within The room is hung with the blue skin Of shifted snake: enfriez'd throughout With eyes of peacocks' trains and trout- Flies' curious wings; and these among Those silver pence that cut the tongue Of the red infant, neatly hung. The glow-worm's eyes; the shining scales Of silv'ry fish; wheat straws, the snail's Soft candle light; the kitling's eyne; Corrupted wood; serve here for shine. No glaring light of bold-fac'd day, Or other over-radiant ray, Ransacks this room; but what weak beams Can make reflected from these gems And multiply; such is the light, But ever doubtful day or night. By this quaint taper light he winds His errors up; and now he finds His moon-tann'd Mab, as somewhat sick, And love knows tender as a chick. Upon six plump dandillions, high- Rear'd, lies her elvish majesty: Whose woolly bubbles seem'd to drown Her Mabship in obedient down. For either sheet was spread the caul That doth the infant's face enthral, When it is born by some enstyl'd The lucky omen of the child , And next to these two blankets o'er- Cast of the finest gossamore. And then a rug of carded wool, Which, sponge-like drinking in the dull Light of the moon, seemed to comply, Cloud-like, the dainty deity. Thus soft she lies: and overhead A spinner's circle is bespread With cob-web curtains, from the roof So neatly sunk as that no proof Of any tackling can declare What gives it hanging in the air. The fringe about this are those threads Broke at the loss of maidenheads: And, all behung with these, pure pearls, Dropp'd from the eyes of ravish'd girls Or writhing brides; when panting they Give unto love the straiter way. For music now, he has the cries Of feigned-lost virginities; The which the elves make to excite A more unconquered appetite. The king's undrest; and now upon The gnat's watchword the elves are gone. And now the bed, and Mab possess'd Of this great little kingly guest; We'll nobly think, what's to be done, He'll do no doubt; this flax is spun . I've paid thee what I promis'd; that's not all; Besides I give thee here a verse that shall When hence thy circummortal part is gone , Arch-like, hold up thy name's inscription. Brave men can't die, whose candid actions are Writ in the poet's endless calendar: Whose vellum and whose volume is the sky, And the pure stars the praising poetry. Besides us two, i' th' temple here's not one To make up now a congregation. Let's to the altar of perfumes then go, And say short prayers; and when we have done so, Then we shall see, how in a little space Saints will come in to fill each pew and place. What conscience, say, is it in thee, When I a heart had one, To take away that heart from me, And to retain thy own? For shame or pity now incline To play a loving part; Either to send me kindly thine, Or give me back my heart. Covet not both; but if thou dost Resolve to part with neither, Why! yet to show that thou art just, Take me and mine together. I cannot suffer; and in this my part Of patience wants. Grief breaks the stoutest heart. To print our poems, the propulsive cause Is fame the breath of popular applause. Ye silent shades, whose each tree here Some relique of a saint doth wear, Who, for some sweetheart's sake, did prove The fire and martyrdom of love: Here is the legend of those saints That died for love, and their complaints: Their wounded hearts and names we find Encarv'd upon the leaves and rind. Give way, give way to me, who come Scorch'd with the self-same martyrdom: And have deserv'd as much love knows As to be canonis'd 'mongst those Whose deeds and deaths here written are Within your greeny calendar: By all those virgins' fillets hung Upon your boughs, and requiems sung For saints and souls departed hence Here honour'd still with frankincense ; By all those tears that have been shed, As a drink-offering to the dead; By all those true love-knots that be With mottoes carv'd on every tree; By sweet Saint Phyllis pity me: By dear Saint Iphis, and the rest Of all those other saints now blest, Me, me, forsaken, here admit Among your myrtles to be writ: That my poor name may have the glory To live remembered in your story. Here a solemn fast we keep, While all beauty lies asleep Hush'd be all things no noise here But the toning of a tear: Or a sigh of such as bring Cowslips for her covering. Of all those three brave brothers fall'n i' th' war Not without glory , noble sir, you are, Despite of all concussions, left the stem To shoot forth generations like to them. Which may be done, if, sir, you can beget Men in their substance, not in counterfeit, Such essences as those three brothers; known Eternal by their own production. Of whom, from fame's white trumpet, this I'll tell, Worthy their everlasting chronicle: Never since first Bellona us'd a shield, Such three brave brothers fell in Mars his field . These were those three Horatii Rome did boast, Rome's were these three Horatii we have lost. One Cur-de-Lion had that age long since; This, three; which three, you make up four, brave prince. O jealousy, that art The canker of the heart; And mak'st all hell Where thou do'st dwell; For pity be No fury, or no firebrand to me. Far from me I'll remove All thoughts of irksome love: And turn to snow, Or crystal grow, To keep still free, O! soul-tormenting jealousy, from thee. Let's live in haste; use pleasures while we may; Could life return, 'twould never lose a day. Here, here I live, And somewhat give Of what I have To those who crave, Little or much, My alms is such; But if my deal Of oil and meal Shall fuller grow, More I'll bestow; E'en but a bit, Or else a crumb, The scrip hath some. Come, leave this loathed country life, and then Grow up to be a Roman citizen. Those mites of time, which yet remain unspent, Waste thou in that most civil government. Get their comportment and the gliding tongue Of those mild men thou art to live among; Then, being seated in that smoother sphere, Decree thy everlasting topic there; And to the farm-house ne'er return at all: Though granges do not love thee, cities shall. While Fates permit us let's be merry, Pass all we must the fatal ferry; And this our life too whirls away With the rotation of the day. Love, I have broke Thy yoke, The neck is free; But when I'm next Love-vexed, Then shackle me. 'Tis better yet To fret The feet or hands, Than to enthral Or gall The neck with bands. You are a lord, an earl, nay more, a man Who writes sweet numbers well as any can; If so, why then are not these verses hurled, Like Sybil's leaves, throughout the ample world? Forth by a ring or some rich carcanet? But being so, then the beholders cry: See, see a gem as rare as Belus' eye. Then public praise does run upon the stone, For a most rich, a rare, a precious one. That we may praise them, or themselves prize you. Virtue concealed , with Horace you'll confess, Differs not much from drowsy slothfulness . I am of all bereft, Save but some few beans left, Whereof, at last, to make For me and mine a cake, Which eaten, they and I Will say our grace, and die. One feeds on lard, and yet is lean, And I but feasting with a bean Grow fat and smooth. The reason is: Jove prospers my meat more than his. Thou sent'st to me a true love-knot, but I Returned a ring of jimmals to imply Thy love had one knot, mine a triple tie. Go hence, and with this parting kiss, Which joins two souls, remember this: Though thou be'st young, kind, soft, and fair And may'st draw thousands with a hair; Yet let these glib temptations be Furies to others, friends to me. Look upon all, and though on fire Thou set their hearts, let chaste desire Steer thee to me, and think, me gone, In having all, that thou hast none. Nor so immured would I have Thee live, as dead and in thy grave; But walk abroad, yet wisely well Stand for my coming, sentinel. And think, as thou do'st walk the street, Me or my shadow thou do'st meet. I know a thousand greedy eyes Will on thy feature tyrannise In my short absence, yet behold Them like some picture, or some mould Fashion'd like thee, which, though 't have ears And eyes, it neither sees or hears. Gifts will be sent, and letters, which Are the expressions of that itch, And salt, which frets thy suitors; fly Both, lest thou lose thy liberty; For, that once lost, thou't fall to one, Then prostrate to a million. But if they woo thee, do thou say, As that chaste Queen of Ithaca Did to her suitors, this web done, Undone as oft as done , I'm won; I will not urge thee, for I know, Though thou art young, thou canst say no, And no again, and so deny Those thy lust-burning incubi. Let them enstyle thee fairest fair, The pearl of princes, yet despair That so thou art, because thou must Believe love speaks it not, but lust; And this their flattery does commend Thee chiefly for their pleasure's end. I am not jealous of thy faith, Or will be, for the axiom saith: He that doth suspect does haste A gentle mind to be unchaste. No, live thee to thy self, and keep Thy thoughts as cold as is thy sleep, And let thy dreams be only fed With this, that I am in thy bed; And thou, then turning in that sphere, Waking shalt find me sleeping there. But yet if boundless lust must scale Thy fortress, and will needs prevail, And wildly force a passage in, Banish consent, and 'tis no sin Of thine; so Lucrece fell and the So Medullina fell; yet none Of these had imputation For the least trespass, 'cause the mind Here was not with the act combin'd. The body sins not, 'tis the will That makes the action, good or ill. And if thy fall should this way come, Triumph in such a martyrdom. I will not over-long enlarge To thee this my religious charge. Take this compression, so by this Means I shall know what other kiss Is mixed with mine, and truly know, Returning, if't be mine or no: Keep it till then; and now, my spouse, For my wished safety pay thy vows And prayers to Venus; if it please The great blue ruler of the seas, Not many full-faced moons shall wane, Lean-horn'd, before I come again As one triumphant, when I find In thee all faith of womankind. Nor would I have thee think that thou Had'st power thyself to keep this vow, But, having 'scaped temptation's shelf, Know virtue taught thee, not thyself. Seeing thee, Soame, I see a goodly man, And in that good a great patrician. Next to which two, among the city powers And thrones, thyself one of those senators; Not wearing purple only for the show, As many conscripts of the city do, But for true service, worthy of that gown, The golden chain, too, and the civic crown. Fair pledges of a fruitful tree, Why do ye fall so fast? Your date is not so past But you may stay yet here a while, To blush and gently smile; And go at last. What! were ye born to be An hour or half's delight, And so to bid good-night? 'Twas pity Nature brought ye forth Merely to show your worth, And lose you quite. But you are lovely leaves, where we May read how soon things have Their end, though ne'er so brave: And after they have shown their pride Like you a while, they glide Into the grave. Man knows where first he ships himself, but he Never can tell where shall his landing be. Nothing comes free-cost here; Jove will not let His gifts go from him, if not bought with sweat. Many we are, and yet but few possess Those fields of everlasting happiness. How long, Perenna, wilt thou see Me languish for the love of thee? Consent, and play a friendly part To save, when thou may'st kill a heart. Trust me, ladies, I will do Nothing to distemper you; If I any fret or vex, Men they shall be, not your sex. Holy rood, come forth and shield Us i' th' city and the field: Safely guard us, now and aye, From the blast that burns by day; And those sounds that us affright In the dead of dampish night. Drive all hurtful fiends us fro, By the time the cocks first crow. And die: As one And gone: I'm made A shade, And laid I' th' grave: There have My cave, Where tell I dwell. Give way, give way, ye gates, and win An easy blessing to your bin And basket, by our entering in. May both with manchet stand replete; Your larders, too, so hung with meat, That though a thousand, thousand eat, Yet, ere twelve moons shall whirl about Their silv'ry spheres, there's none may doubt But more's sent in than was served out. Next, may your dairies prosper so As that your pans no ebb may know; But if they do, the more to flow, Like to a solemn sober stream Bank'd all with lilies, and the cream Of sweetest cowslips filling them. Then, may your plants be prest with fruit, Nor bee, or hive you have be mute; But sweetly sounding like a lute. Next, may your duck and teeming hen Both to the cock's tread say Amen; And for their two eggs render ten. Last, may your harrows, shears, and ploughs, Your stacks, your stocks, your sweetest mows, All prosper by our virgin vows. Alas! we bless, but see none here That brings us either ale or beer; In a dry house all things are near . Let's leave a longer time to wait, Where rust and cobwebs bind the gate, And all live here with needy fate. Where chimneys do for ever weep For want of warmth, and stomachs keep, With noise, the servants' eyes from sleep. It is in vain to sing, or stay Our free feet here; but we'll away: Yet to the Lares this we'll say: The time will come when you'll be sad And reckon this for fortune bad, T'ave lost the good ye might have had. Twice has Pudica been a bride, and led By holy Hymen to the nuptial bed. Two youths she's known thrice two, and twice three years; Yet not a lily from the bed appears: Nor will; for why, Pudica this may know, Trees never bear unless they first do blow . These springs were maidens once that lov'd, But lost to that they most approv'd: My story tells by Love they were Turn'd to these springs which we see here; The pretty whimpering that they make, When of the banks their leave they take, Tells ye but this, they are the same, In nothing chang'd but in their name. My wooing's ended: now my wedding's near When gloves are giving, gilded be you there. 'Tis heresy in others: in your face That scar's no schism, but the sign of grace. I begin to wane in sight; Shortly I shall bid good-night: Then no gazing more about, When the tapers once are out. Stand with thy graces forth, brave man, and rise High with thine own auspicious destinies: Nor leave the search, and proof, till thou canst find These, or those ends, to which thou wast design'd. Thy lucky genius and thy guiding star Have made thee prosperous in thy ways thus far: Nor will they leave thee till they both have shown Thee to the world a prime and public one. Then, when thou see'st thine age all turn'd to gold, Remember what thy Herrick thee foretold, When at the holy threshold of thine house He boded good luck to thy self and spouse . Lastly, be mindful, when thou art grown great, That towers high rear'd dread most the lightning's threat: Whenas the humble cottages not fear The cleaving bolt of Jove the thunderer . Dew sat on Julia's hair And spangled too, Like leaves that laden are With trembling dew: Or glitter'd to my sight, As when the beams Have their reflected light Danc'd by the streams. How can I choose but love and follow her Whose shadow smells like milder pomander? How can I choose but kiss her, whence does come The storax, spikenard, myrrh, and laudanum? Great men by small means oft are overthrown; He's lord of thy life who contemns his own . All things are open to these two events, Or to rewards, or else to punishments. Shame is a bad attendant to a state: He rents his crown that fears the people's hate . Since to the country first I came I have lost my former flame: And, methinks, I not inherit, As I did, my ravish'd spirit. If I write a verse or two, 'Tis with very much ado; In regard I want that wine Which should conjure up a line. Yet, though now of Muse bereft, I have still the manners left For to thank you, noble sir, For those gifts you do confer Upon him who only can Be in prose a grateful man. I could never love indeed; Never see mine own heart bleed: Never crucify my life, Or for widow, maid, or wife. I could never seek to please One or many mistresses: Never like their lips to swear Oil of roses still smelt there. I could never break my sleep, Fold mine arms, sob, sigh, or weep: Never beg, or humbly woo With oaths and lies, as others do. I could never walk alone; Put a shirt of sackcloth on: Never keep a fast, or pray For good luck in love that day. But have hitherto liv'd free As the air that circles me: And kept credit with my heart, Neither broke i' th' whole, or part. Would ye have fresh cheese and cream? Julia's breast can give you them: And, if more, each nipple cries: To your cream here's strawberries. Ah! Lycidas, come tell me why Thy whilom merry oat By thee doth so neglected lie, And never purls a note? I prithee speak. I will. Say on. 'Tis thou, and only thou, That art the cause, Endymion. For love's sake, tell me how. In this regard: that thou do'st play Upon another plain, And for a rural roundelay Strik'st now a courtly strain. Thou leav'st our hills, our dales, our bowers, Our finer fleeced sheep, Unkind to us, to spend thine hours Where shepherds should not keep. I mean the court: Let Latmos be My lov'd Endymion's court. But I the courtly state would see. Then see it in report. What has the court to do with swains, Where Phyllis is not known? Nor does it mind the rustic strains Break, if thou lov'st us, this delay. Dear Lycidas, e're long I vow, by Pan, to come away And pipe unto thy song. Then Jessamine, with Florabell, And dainty Amaryllis, With handsome-handed Drosomell Shall prank thy hook with lilies. And Thyrsis, they shall follow With all the rest; while thou alone Shalt lead like young Apollo. And till thou com'st, thy Lycidas, In every genial cup, Shall write in spice: Endymion 'twas That kept his piping up. And, my most lucky swain, when I shall live to see Endymion's moon to fill up full, remember me: Meantime, let Lycidas have leave to pipe to thee. Bright tulips, we do know You had your coming hither, And fading-time does show That ye must quickly wither. Your sisterhoods may stay, And smile here for your hour; But die ye must away, Even as the meanest flower. Come, virgins, then, and see Your frailties, and bemoan ye; For, lost like these, 'twill be As time had never known ye. That love last long, let it thy first care be To find a wife that is most fit for thee. Be she too wealthy or too poor, be sure Love in extremes can never long endure . Reach, with your whiter hands, to me Some crystal of the spring; And I about the cup shall see Fresh lilies flourishing. Or else, sweet nymphs, do you but this, To th' glass your lips incline; And I shall see by that one kiss The water turn'd to wine. To this white temple of my heroes here, Beset with stately figures everywhere Of such rare saintships, who did here consume Their lives in sweets, and left in death perfume, Come, thou brave man! And bring with thee a stone Unto thine own edification. High are these statues here, besides no less Strong than the heavens for everlastingness: Where build aloft; and, being fix'd by these, Set up thine own eternal images. A golden fly one show'd to me, Clos'd in a box of ivory, Where both seem'd proud: the fly to have His burial in an ivory grave; The ivory took state to hold A corpse as bright as burnish'd gold. One fate had both, both equal grace; The buried, and the burying-place. Not Virgil's gnat, to whom the spring All flowers sent to's burying; Not Martial's bee, which in a bead Of amber quick was buried; Nor that fine worm that does inter Herself i' th' silken sepulchre; Nor my rare Phil, that lately was With lilies tomb'd up in a glass; More honour had than this same fly, Dead, and closed up in ivory. Julia, when thy Herrick dies, Close thou up thy poet's eyes: And his last breath, let it be Taken in by none but thee. If thou ask me, dear, wherefore I do write of thee no more, I must answer, sweet, thy part Less is here than in my heart. Fill me my wine in crystal; thus, and thus I see't in's puris naturalibus : Unmix'd. I love to have it smirk and shine; 'Tis sin I know, 'tis sin to throttle wine . What madman's he, that when it sparkles so, Will cool his flames or quench his fires with snow? Jealous girls these sometimes were, While they liv'd or lasted here: Turn'd to flowers, still they be Yellow, mark'd for jealousy. To fetch me wine my Lucia went, Bearing a crystal continent: But, making haste, it came to pass She brake in two the purer glass, Then smil'd, and sweetly chid her speed; So with a blush beshrew'd the deed. Good precepts we must firmly hold, By daily learning we wax old. If I dare write to you, my lord, who are Of your own self a public theatre, And, sitting, see the wiles, ways, walks of wit, And give a righteous judgment upon it, What need I care, though some dislike me should, If Dorset say what Herrick writes is good? We know y'are learn'd i' th' Muses, and no less In our state-sanctions, deep or bottomless. Whose smile can make a poet, and your glance Dash all bad poems out of countenance; So that an author needs no other bays For coronation than your only praise, And no one mischief greater than your frown To null his numbers, and to blast his crown. Few live the life immortal. He ensures His fame's long life who strives to set up yours. Thou'rt hence removing like a shepherd's tent , And walk thou must the way that others went: Fall thou must first, then rise to life with these, Mark'd in thy book for faithful witnesses. What though the heaven be lowering now, And look with a contracted brow? We shall discover, by-and-by, A repurgation of the sky; And when those clouds away are driven, Then will appear a cheerful heaven. I held Love's head while it did ache; But so it chanc'd to be, The cruel pain did his forsake, And forthwith came to me. Ay me! how shall my grief be still'd? Or where else shall we find One like to me, who must be kill'd For being too-too kind? Next is your lot, fair, to be number'd one, Here, in my book's canonisation: Late you come in; but you a saint shall be, In chief, in this poetic liturgy. First, for your shape, the curious cannot show Any one part that's dissonant in you: And 'gainst your chaste behaviour there's no plea, Since you are known to be Penelope. Thus fair and clean you are, although there be A mighty strife 'twixt form and chastity . Fair and foul days trip cross and pile; the fair Far less in number than our foul days are. Why, madam, will ye longer weep, Whenas your baby's lull'd asleep? And pretty child feels now no more Those pains it lately felt before. All now is silent; groans are fled: Your child lies still, yet is not dead; But rather like a flower hid here To spring again another year. Come thou, who art the wine and wit Of all I've writ: The grace, the glory, and the best Piece of the rest. Thou art of what I did intend The all and end; And what was made, was made to meet Thee, thee, my sheet. Come then, and be to my chaste side Both bed and bride. We two, as reliques left, will have One rest, one grave. And, hugging close, we will not fear Lust entering here, Where all desires are dead or cold As is the mould; And all affections are forgot, Or trouble not. Here, here the slaves and pris'ners be From shackles free: And weeping widows long oppress'd Do here find rest. The wronged client ends his laws Here, and his cause. Here those long suits of chancery lie Quiet, or die: And all Star-Chamber bills do cease, Or hold their peace. Here needs no Court for our Request, Where all are best, All wise, all equal, and all just Alike i' th' dust. Nor need we here to fear the frown Of court or crown: Where fortune bears no sway o'er things, There all are kings . In this securer place we'll keep, As lull'd asleep; Or for a little time we'll lie As robes laid by; To be another day re-worn, Turn'd, but not torn: Or, like old testaments engrost, Lock'd up, not lost. And for a while lie here conceal'd, To be reveal'd Next at that great Platonick year, And then meet here. One more by thee, love, and desert have sent, T' enspangle this expansive firmament. O flame of beauty! come, appear, appear A virgin taper, ever shining here. What now we like anon we disapprove: The new successor drives away old love . Born I was to meet with age, And to walk life's pilgrimage. Much I know of time is spent, Tell I can't what's resident. Howsoever, cares, adieu! I'll have nought to say to you: But I'll spend my coming hours Drinking wine and crown'd with flowers. Fortune did never favour one Fully, without exception; Though free she be, there's something yet Still wanting to her favourite. Live, live with me, and thou shall see The pleasures I'll prepare for thee; What sweets the country can afford Shall bless thy bed and bless thy board. The soft, sweet moss shall be thy bed With crawling woodbine over-spread; By which the silver-shedding streams Shall gently melt thee into dreams. Thy clothing, next, shall be a gown Made of the fleece's purest down. The tongues of kids shall be thy meat, Their milk thy drink; and thou shalt eat The paste of filberts for thy bread, With cream of cowslips buttered; Thy feasting-tables shall be hills With daisies spread and daffodils, Where thou shalt sit, and red-breast by, For meat, shall give thee melody. I'll give thee chains and carcanets Of primroses and violets. A bag and bottle thou shalt have, That richly wrought, and this as brave; So that as either shall express The wearer's no mean shepherdess. At shearing-times, and yearly wakes, When Themilis his pastime makes, There thou shalt be; and be the wit, Nay, more, the feast, and grace of it. On holidays, when virgins meet To dance the heyes with nimble feet, Thou shall come forth, and then appear The queen of roses for that year; And having danced, 'bove all the best, Carry the garland from the rest. In wicker baskets maids shall bring To thee, my dearest shepherling, The blushing apple, bashful pear, And shame-fac'd plum, all simp'ring there. Walk in the groves, and thou shalt find The name of Phyllis in the rind Of every straight and smooth-skin tree; Where kissing that, I'll twice kiss thee. To thee a sheep-hook I will send, Be-prank'd with ribands to this end; This, this alluring hook might be Less for to catch a sheep than me. Thou shalt have possets, wassails fine, Not made of ale, but spiced wine, To make thy maids and self free mirth, All sitting near the glitt'ring hearth. Thou shalt have ribands, roses, rings, Gloves, garters, stockings, shoes, and strings Of winning colours, that shall move Others to lust, but me to love. These, nay, and more, thine own shall be If thou wilt love, and live with me. When I consider, dearest, thou dost stay But here a-while, to languish and decay, Like to these garden-glories, which here be The flowery-sweet resemblances of thee; With grief of heart, methinks, I thus do cry: Would thou hadst ne'er been born, or might'st not die. Rare are thy cheeks, Susanna, which do show Ripe cherries smiling, while that others blow. Clear are her eyes, Like purest skies, Discovering from thence A baby there That turns each sphere, Her pretty feet Like snails did creep A little out, and then, As if they played at Bo-Peep, Did soon draw in again. For civil, clean, and circumcised wit, And for the comely carriage of it, Thou art the man, the only man best known, Mark'd for the true wit of a million: From whom we'll reckon. Wit came in but since The calculation of thy birth, brave Mince. Fly me not, though I be grey: Lady, this I know you'll say; Better look the roses red When with white commingled. Black your hairs are, mine are white; This begets the more delight, When things meet most opposite: As in pictures we descry Venus standing Vulcan by. If accusation only can draw blood, None shall be guiltless, be he ne'er so good. As thou deserv'st, be proud; then gladly let The Muse give thee the Delphic coronet. Goddess, I begin an art; Come thou in, with thy best part For to make the texture lie Each way smooth and civilly; And a broad-fac'd owl shall be Offer'd up with vows to thee. 'Tis evening, my sweet, And dark, let us meet; Long time w'ave here been a-toying, And never, as yet, That season could get Wherein t'ave had an enjoying. For pity or shame, Then let not love's flame Be ever and ever a-spending; Since now to the port The path is but short, And yet our way has no ending. Time flies away fast, Our hours do waste, The while we never remember How soon our life, here, Grows old with the year That dies with the next December. Fortune no higher project can devise Than to sow discord 'mongst the enemies. Preposterous is that government, and rude, When kings obey the wilder multitude. Give way, and be ye ravish'd by the sun, And hang the head whenas the act is done, Spread as he spreads, wax less as he does wane; And as he shuts, close up to maids again. Give me one kiss And no more: If so be this Makes you poor, To enrich you, I'll restore For that one two Thousand score. Thou know'st, my Julia, that it is thy turn This morning's incense to prepare and burn. The chaplet and Inarculum here be, With the white vestures, all attending thee. This day the queen-priest thou art made, t' appease Love for our very many trespasses. One chief transgression is, among the rest, Because with flowers her temple was not dressed; The next, because her altars did not shine With daily fires; the last, neglect of wine; For which her wrath is gone forth to consume Us all, unless preserved by thy perfume. Take then thy censer, put in fire, and thus, O pious priestess! make a peace for us. For our neglect Love did our death decree; That we escape. Redemption comes by thee . Born I was to be old, And for to die here: After that, in the mould Long for to lie here. But before that day comes Still I be bousing, For I know in the tombs There's no carousing. Eaten I have; and though I had good cheer, I did not sup, because no friends were there. Where mirth and friends are absent when we dine Or sup, there wants the incense and the wine. All things o'er-ruled are here by chance: The greatest man's inheritance, Where'er the lucky lot doth fall, Serves but for place of burial. Ursley, she thinks those velvet patches grace The candid temples of her comely face; But he will say, whoe'er those circlets seeth, They be but signs of Ursley's hollow teeth. Here we securely live and eat The cream of meat, And keep eternal fires, By which we sit, and do divine As wine And rage inspires. If full we charm, then call upon To grace the frantic thyrse; And having drunk, we raise a shout To praise his verse. Then cause we Horace to be read, Which sung, or said, A goblet to the brim Of lyric wine, both swell'd and crown'd, We quaff to him. Thus, thus we live, and spend the hours In wine and flowers, And make the frolic year, The month, the week, the instant day To stay The longer here. Come then, brave knight, and see the cell Wherein I dwell, And my enchantments too, Which love and noble freedom is; And this Shall fetter you. Take horse, and come, or be so kind To send your mind, Though but in numbers few, And I shall think I have the heart, Or part Nor is my number full till I inscribe Thee, sprightly Soame, one of my righteous tribe; A tribe of one lip, leaven, and of one Civil behaviour, and religion; A stock of saints, where ev'ry one doth wear A stole of white, and canonised here; Among which holies be thou ever known, Brave kinsman, mark'd out with the whiter stone Which seals thy glory, since I do prefer Thee here in my eternal calender. Go I must; when I am gone, Write but this upon my stone: Chaste I lived, without a wife, That's the story of my life. Strewings need none, every flower Is in this word, bachelour. Our mortal parts may wrapp'd in sear-cloths lie: Great spirits never with their bodies die . Out of the world he must, who once comes in. No man exempted is from death, or sin. Let me sleep this night away, Till the dawning of the day; Then at th' opening of mine eyes I, and all the world, shall rise. 'Tis worse than barbarous cruelty to show No part of pity on a conquered foe. Here, here I live with what my board Can with the smallest cost afford. Though ne'er so mean the viands be, They well content my Prew and me. Or pea, or bean, or wort, or beet, Whatever comes, content makes sweet. Here we rejoice, because no rent We pay for our poor tenement, Wherein we rest, and never fear The landlord or the usurer. The quarter-day does ne'er affright Our peaceful slumbers in the night. We eat our own and batten more, Because we feed on no man's score; But pity those whose flanks grow great, Swell'd with the lard of others' meat. We bless our fortunes when we see Our own beloved privacy; And like our living, where we're known To very few, or else to none. He who commends the vanquished, speaks the power And glorifies the worthy conqueror. Some parts may perish, die thou canst not all: The most of thee shall 'scape the funeral. If ye will with Mab find grace, Set each platter in his place; Rake the fire up, and get Water in, ere sun be set. Wash your pails, and cleanse your dairies; Sweep your house, who doth not so, Mab will pinch her by the toe. Did I or love, or could I others draw To the indulgence of the rugged law, The first foundation of that zeal should be By reading all her paragraphs in thee, Who dost so fitly with the laws unite, As if you two were one hermaphrodite. Nor courts thou her because she's well attended With wealth, but for those ends she was intended: Which were, and still her offices are known, Law is to give to ev'ry one his own ; To shore the feeble up against the strong, To shield the stranger and the poor from wrong. This was the founder's grave and good intent: To keep the outcast in his tenement, To free the orphan from that wolf-like man, Who is his butcher more than guardian; To dry the widow's tears, and stop her swoons, By pouring balm and oil into her wounds. This was the old way; and 'tis yet thy course To keep those pious principles in force. Modest I will be; but one word I'll say, Like to a sound that's vanishing away, Sooner the inside of thy hand shall grow Hisped and hairy, ere thy palm shall know A postern-bribe took, or a forked fee, To fetter Justice, when she might be free. Eggs I'll not shave ; but yet, brave man, if I Was destin'd forth to golden sovereignty, A prince I'd be, that I might thee prefer To be my counsel both and chancellor. Man is a watch, wound up at first, but never Wound up again: once down, he's down for ever. The watch once down, all motions then do cease; And man's pulse stop'd, all passions sleep in peace. As in our clothes, so likewise he who looks, Shall find much farcing buckram in our books. When I behold a forest spread With silken trees upon thy head, And when I see that other dress Of flowers set in comeliness; When I behold another grace In the ascent of curious lace, Which like a pinnacle doth show The top, and the top-gallant too. Then, when I see thy tresses bound Into an oval, square, or round, And knit in knots far more than I Can tell by tongue, or true-love tie; Next, when those lawny films I see Play with a wild civility, And all those airy silks to flow, Alluring me, and tempting so: I must confess mine eye and heart Dotes less on Nature than on Art. Sweet Bridget blush'd, and therewithal Fresh blossoms from her cheeks did fall. I thought at first 'twas but a dream, Till after I had handled them And smelt them, then they smelt to me As blossoms of the almond tree. I played with Love, as with the fire The wanton Satyr did; Nor did I know, or could descry What under there was hid. That Satyr he but burnt his lips; But mine's the greater smart, For kissing Love's dissembling chips The fire scorch'd my heart. If men can say that beauty dies, Marbles will swear that here it lies. If, reader, then thou canst forbear In public loss to shed a tear, The dew of grief upon this stone Will tell thee pity thou hast none. One of the five straight branches of my hand Is lop'd already, and the rest but stand Expecting when to fall, which soon will be; First dies the leaf, the bough next, next the tree. But a minute's life with me: Such a fire I espy Walking in and out her eye, As at once I freeze and fry. Upon her cheeks she wept, and from those showers Sprang up a sweet nativity of flowers. Aetherias, lascive, cupis volitare per auras: I, fuge; sed poteras tutior esse domi. Erubuit posuitque meum Lucretia librum, Sed coram Bruto; Brute, recede, leget. Nec doctum satis et parum severum, Sed non rusticulum nimis libellum I perfer: Sed ne tempore non tuo disertam Pulses ebria januam, videto. Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas. Hc hora est tua, cum furit Lyus, Cum regnat rosa, cum madent capilli: Tunc me vel rigidi legant Catones. Of crackling laurel, which foresounds A plenteous harvest to your grounds: Harum pars tecta quatiebant cuspide thyrsos Pars obscura cavis celebrabant orgia cistis, Orgia, qu frustra cupiunt audire profani. Cur leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Nicholas and Nell did lately sit Playing for sport at cherry-pit; They both did throw, and, having thrown, He got the pit and she the stone. Nor know thy happy and unenvied state Owes more to virtue than to fate, Or fortune too; for what the first secures, That as herself, or heaven, endures. The two last fail, and by experience make Known, not they give again, they take. Prithee not smile Or smile more inly, lest thy looks beguile, I prithee draw in Thy gazing fires, lest at their sight the sin Of fierce idolatry shoot into me, and I turn apostate to the strict command Of nature; bid me now farewell, or smile More ugly, lest thy tempting looks beguile. So swift streams meet, so springs with gladder smiles Meet after long divorcement made by isles: When love the child of likeness urgeth on Their crystal waters to an union. So meet stol'n kisses when the moonie night Calls forth fierce lovers to their wisht delight : So kings and queens meet, when desire convinces All thoughts, save those that tend to getting princes. As I meet thee, Soul of my life and fame! Eternal Lamp of Love, whose radiant flame Out- darts the heaven's Osiris; and thy gems Darken the splendour of his mid-day beams. Welcome, O welcome, my illustrious spouse! Welcome as are the ends unto my vows: Nay , far more welcome than the happy soil The sea-scourged merchant, after all his toil, Salutes with tears of joy, when fires display The smoking chimneys of his Ithaca. Where hast thou been so long from my embraces, Poor pitied exile? Tell me, did thy Graces Fly discontented hence, and for a time Choose rather for to bless some other clime? Oh, then, not longer let my sweet defer Her buxom smiles from me, her worshipper! Why have those amber looks, the which have been Time-past so fragrant, sickly now call'd in Like a dull twilight? Tell me, hath my soul Prophaned in speech or done an act that is foul Against thy purer essence? For that fault I'll expiate with sulphur, hair and salt: And with the crystal humour of the spring Purge hence the guilt, and kill the quarrelling. Wilt thou not smile, nor tell me what's amiss? Have I been cold to hug thee, too remiss, Too temperate in embracing? Tell me, has desire To-thee-ward died in the embers, and no fire Left in the raked-up ashes , as a mark To testify the glowing of a spark? I must confess I left thee, and appeal 'Twas done by me more to increase my zeal, And double my affection ; as do those Whose love grows more inflamed by being froze . But to forsake thee, could there ever be A thought of such-like possibility? When all the world may know that vines shall lack Grapes, before Herrick leave Canary sack. Sack is my life, my leaven, salt to all My dearest dainties, nay, 'tis the principal Fire unto all my functions, gives me blood, An active spirit, full marrow, and, what is good, Sack makes me sprightful, airy to be borne, Like Iphyclus, upon the tops of corn. Sack makes me nimble, as the wingd hours, To dance and caper o'er the tops of flowers, And ride the sunbeams. Can there be a thing Under the cope of heaven that can bring More joy unto my soul , or can present My Genius with a fuller blandishment? Help from the garlick, onion and the leek, And pay no vows to thee, who art the best God, and far more transcending than the rest? Had Cassius, that weak water-drinker, known Thee in the Vine, or had but tasted one Small chalice of thy nectar, he, even he As the wise Cato had approved of thee. Had not Jove's son, the rash Tyrinthian swain Invited to the Thesbian banquet , ta'ne Full goblets of thy blood; his lustful sprite Had not kept heat for fifty maids that night. As Queens meet Queens, so let sack come to me Or as Cleopatra unto Anthonie, When her high visage did at once present To the Triumvir love and wonderment. Swell up my feeble sinews , let my blood Fill each part full of fire, let all my good Parts be encouraged , active to do What thy commanding soul shall put me to, And till I turn apostate to thy love, Which here I vow to serve, never remove Thy blessing from me; but Apollo's curse Blast all mine actions; or, a thing that's worse, When these circumstants have the fate to see The time when I prevaricate from thee, Call me the Son of Beer, and then confine Me to the tap, the toast, the turf; let wine Ne'er shine upon me; let my verses all Haste to a sudden death and funeral: And last, dear Spouse, when I thee disavow, May ne'er prophetic Daphne crown my brow. The violets, as poets tell, With Venus wrangling went. What's that we see from far? the spring of Day Bloom'd from the East, or fair enamell'd May Blown out of April; or some new Star fill'd with glory to our view, To add a nobler Planet to the seven? Say or do we not descry To move, or rather the Emerging Venus from the sea? 'Tis she! 'tis she! or else some more Divine Enlightened substance; mark how from the shrine Of holy Saints she paces on Throwing about Vermilion And Amber: spice- ing the chafte-air with fumes of Paradise. Then come on, come on, and yield A savour like unto a blessed field, When the bedabbled morn Washes the golden ears of corn. Lead on fair paranymphs, the while her eyes, Guilty of somewhat, ripe the strawberries And cherries in her cheeks, there's cream Already spilt, her rays must gleam Gently thereon, And so beget lust and temptation To surfeit and to hunger. Help on her pace; and, though she lag, yet stir Her homewards; well she knows Her heart's at home, howe'er she goes. See where she comes; and smell how all the street Breathes Vine-yards and Pomegranates: O how sweet, As a fir'd Altar, is each stone The Phnix nest, Built up of odours, burneth in her breast. Who would not then consume He burns to embers on the Pile. Mount up thy flames, and let thy Torch Display thy Bridegroom in the porch In his desires And roll about, and in their motions burn Their balls to cinders: haste Or, like a firebrand , he will waste. See how he waves his hand, and through his eyes Shoots forth his jealous soul, for to surprise And ravish you his Bride, do you Not now perceive the soul of C C , Your mayden knight, With kisses to inspire You with his just and holy ire. If so, glide through the ranks of Virgins , pass The Showers of Roses, lucky four-leaved grass: The while the cloud of younglings sing, And drown you with a flowery spring: While some repeat Your praise, and bless you, sprinkling you with Wheat, While that others do divine, 'Blest is the Bride on whom the Sun doth shine'; And thousands gladly wish You multiply as do the fish. Why then go forward, sweet Auspicious Bride, And come upon your Bridegroom like a Tide Bearing down Time before you; hye Swell, mix, and loose your souls; imply Like streams which flow Encurled together, and no difference show In their silver waters; run Into your selves like wool together spun. Or blend so as the sight Of two makes one Hermaphrodite. And, beauteous Bride, we do confess you are wise Set on yourself by being nice. But yet take heed What now you seem be not the same indeed, And turn Apostat a : Love will Part of the way be met, or sit stone still; On them, and though y'are slow In going yet, howsoever go. How long, soft Bride, shall your dear C make Love to your welcome with the mystic cake, How long, oh pardon, shall the house And the smooth Handmaids pay their vows With oil and wine For your approach, yet see their Altars pine? How long shall the page to please You stand for to surrender up the keys Of the glad house? Come, come, Or Lar will freeze to death at home. Welcome at last unto the Threshold, Time Throned in a saffron evening, seems to chime All in, kiss and so enter. If A prayer must be said, be brief, The easy Gods For such neglect have only myrtle rods To stroke, not strike; fear you Not more, mild Nymph, than they would have you do; But dread that you do more offend In that you do begin than end. And now y'are entered, see the coddled cook Runs from his Torrid Zone to pry and look And bless his dainty mistress; see How th' aged point out: 'This is she Who now must sway Us and God shield her with her yea and nay,' And the smirk Butler thinks it Sin in his nap'ry not t' express his wit; Each striving to devise Some gin wherewith to catch her eyes. What though your laden Altar now has won The credit from the table of the Sun For earth and sea; this cost On you is altogether lost Because you feed Not on the flesh of beasts, but on the seed Of contemplation: your, Your eyes are they, wherewith you draw the pure Elixir to the mind Which sees the body fed, yet pined. If you must needs for ceremonie's sake Bless a sack posset, Luck go with you , take The night charm quickly; you have spells And magic for to end, and Hells To pass, but such And of such torture as no God would grutch To live therein for ever: fry, Aye and consume, and grow again to die, And live, and in that case Love the damnation of that place. the To Bed, to Bed, sweet Turtles now, and write This the shortest day, this the longest night And yet too short for you; 'tis we Who count this night as long as three, Lying alone Hearing the clock go Ten, Eleven, Twelve, One: Quickly, quickly then prepare. And let the young men and the Bridemaids share Your garters, and their joints Encircle with the Bridegroom's points. By the Bride's eyes, and by the teeming life Of her green hopes, we charge you that no strife, Further than virtue lends , gets place Among you catching at her Lace. Oh, do not fall Foul in these noble pastimes, lest you call Discord in, and so divide The gentle Bridegroom and the fragrous Bride, Which Love forefend: but spoken Be't to your praise: 'No peace was broken'. Strip her of spring-time, tender whimpering maids, Now Autumn's come, when all those flowery aids Of her delays must end, dispose That Lady-smock, that pansy and that Rose Neatly apart; But for prick-madam, and for gentle-heart, And soft maiden-blush, the Bride Makes holy these, all others lay aside: Then strip her, or unto her Let him come who dares undo her. As we think, singing to the din Of many a warbling cherubin: List, oh list! how To light their Tapers at the Bride's bright eye; To bed, or her they'll tire, Were she an element of fire. And to your more bewitching, see the proud Plump bed bear up, and rising like a cloud, Tempting thee, too, too modest; can You see it brussle like a swan And you be cold To meet it, when it woos and seems to fold The arms to hug you ? throw, throw Yourselves into that main, in the full flow Of the white pride, and drown The stars with you in floods of down. You see 'tis ready, and the maze of love Looks for the treaders; everywhere is wove Wit and new mystery, read and Put in practice, to understand And know each wile, Each Hieroglyphic of a kiss or smile; And do it in the full, reach High in your own conceipts, and rather teach Nature and Art one more Sport than they ever knew before. Know so long Treaties; beat the Drum Aloft, and like two armies, come And guild the field, Fight bravely for the flame of mankind, yield Not to this, or that assault, For that would prove more Heresy than fault In combatants to fly 'Fore this or that hath got the victory. But since it must be done, despatch and sew Up in a sheet your Bride, and what if so It be with rib of Rock and Brass, Yea tower her up, as Danae was, ye Think you that this, Or Hell itself, a powerful Bulwark is? I tell you no; but like a ye Bold bolt of thunder he will make his way, And rend the cloud, and throw The sheet about, like flakes of snow. All now is hushed in silence: Midwife-moon With all her Owl-ey'd issue begs a boon Which you must grant; that's entrance with Which extract, all we  call pith And quintessence Of Planetary bodies; so commence, All fair constellations Looking upon you that the Nations Springing from to such Fires May blaze the virtue of their Sires. solliciti plena timoris amor. Qui fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus Non facit ille deos: qui rogat, ille facit. A little mushroom table spread After the dance , they set on bread, A yellow corn of hecky wheat With some small sandy grit to eat His choice bits; with which in a trice They make a feast less great than nice. But all the while his eye was served We dare not think his ear was sterved: But that there was in place to stir His fire the pittering Grasshopper; The merry Cricket, puling Fly, The piping Gnat for minstralcy. The Humming Dor, the dying Swan, And each a choice Musician. And now we must imagine first, The Elves present to quench his thirst A pure seed-pearl of infant dew, Brought and beswetted in a blue And pregnant violet; which done, His kitling eyes begin to run Quite through the table, where he spies The horns of papery Butterflies: Of which he eats, but with a little Neat cool allay of Cuckoo's spittle; A little Fuz-ball pudding stands By, yet not blessed by his hands That was too coarse, but he not spares To feed upon the candid hairs Of a dried canker, with a sagg And well bestuffed Bee's sweet bag: Stroking his pallet with some store Of Emme t eggs. What would he more, But Beards of Mice, an Ewt's stew'd thigh, A pickled maggot and a dry Hipp, with a Red cap worm, that's shut Within the concave of a Nut Brown as his tooth, and with the fat And well-boiled inchpin of a Bat. A bloated Earwig with the Pith Of sugared rush aglads him with; But most of all the Glow-worm's fire. As most betickling his desire To know his Queen, mixt with the far- Fetcht binding-jelly of a star. The silk-worm's seed , a little moth Lately fattened in a piece of cloth; Withered cherries; Mandrake's ears; Mole's eyes; to these the slain stag's tears; The unctuous dewlaps of a Snail; The broke heart of a Nightingale O'er-come in music; with a wine Ne'er ravished from the flattering Vine, But gently pressed from the soft side Of the most sweet and dainty Bride, Brought in a daisy chalice , which He fully quaffs off to bewitch His blood too high . This done, commended Grace by his Priest, the feast is ended. Ampliat aetatis spatium sibi vir bonus: hoc est Vivere bis vita posse priore frui. They call themselves the Tytere-tues, And wore a blue rib-bin; And when a-drie would not refuse To drink. O fearful sin! The council, which is thought most wise, Did sit so long upon it, That they grew weary and did rise, And could make nothing on it. We have no vineyards which do bear Their lustful clusters all the year, Nor odoriferous Orchards, like to Alcinous; Nor gall the seas Our witty appetites to please With mullet, turbot, gilt-head bought At a high rate and further brought. Nor can we glory of a great And stuffed magazine of wheat; We have no bath Of oil, but only rich in faith O'er which the hand Of fortune can have no command, But what she gives not, she not takes, But of her own a spoil she makes. Live in thy peace; as for myself, When I am bruisd on the shelf Of Time, and read Eternal daylight o'er my head: When with the rheum, With cough and ptisick, I consume Into an heap of cinders: then The Ages fled I'll call again, And with a tear compare these last And cold times unto those are past, With her lean lips shall kiss them dry Then will we sit By the fire, foretelling snow and sleet And weather by our aches, grown Old enough to be our own Is for to know what change is near, Then to assuage The gripings in the chine by age, I'll call my young Ilus to sing such a song I made upon my mistress' breast; Or such a blush at such a feast. Then shall he read my Lily fine Entomb'd within a crystal shrine: My Primrose next: A piece then of a higher text; For to beget In me a more transcendent heat Than that insinuating fire Which crept into each reverend Sire, When the high Helen her fair cheeks Showed to the army of the Greeks; At which I'll rise Blind though as midnight in my eyes , And hearing it, Flutter and crow, and , in a fit Of young concupiscence, and feel New flames within the aged steal . I'll call to mind the times forgot And oft between Sigh out the Times that we have seen! And shed a tear , And twisting my Ilus hair , Doting, I'll weep and say in truth Baucis, these were the sins of youth. Then will I cause my hopeful Lad If a wild Apple can be had To crown the Hearth Lar thus conspiring with our mirth ; Next to infuse Our better beer into the cruse: Which, neatly spiced, we'll first carouse Unto the Vesta of the house. Then the next health to friends of mine In oysters, and Burgundian wine, And Nansagge , sons of clune and pith, Such who know well To board the magic bowl , and spill All mighty blood, and can do more Than Jove and Chaos them before . To whose glad threshold and free door I may, a poet, come, though poor. That old sack Young Herrick took to entertain The Muses in a sprightly vein. misplacement of the epithet, reading: But we must on and thither tend Where Tullus and rich Ancus blend, etc., for Where Ancus and rich Tullus. What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years That hang in file upon these silver hairs Could not produce, Thy wrinkles are no more nor less. Jack, as he piped, laughed among, The Friar with briars was vilely stung, He hopped wondrous high. At last the Friar held up his hand And said: I can no longer stand, Oh! I shall dancing die. Some sort of pear, Apple or plum, is neatly laid As if it was a tribute paid By the round urchin; some mixt wheat The which the ant did taste, not eat; Chippings, the mice filched from the bin Of the gray farmer, and to these The scraps of lentils, chitted peas, Dried honeycombs, brown acorn cups, Out of the which he sometimes sups His herby broth, and there close by Are pucker'd bullace, cankers ? , dry Kernels, and withered haws; the rest Are trinkets fal'n from the kite's nest, As butter'd bread, the which the wild Bird snatched away from the crying child, Blue pins, tags, fesenes, beads and things Of higher price, as half-jet rings, Ribbons and then some silken shreaks The virgins lost at barley-breaks. Many a purse-string, many a thread Of gold and silver therein spread, Many a counter, many a die, Half rotten and without an eye, Lies here about , and, as we guess, Some bits of thimbles seem to dress The brave cheap work; and for to pave The excellency of this cave, Squirrels and children's teeth late shed , Serve here, both which enchequered With castors' doucets, which poor they Bite off themselves to 'scape away: Brown toadstones , ferrets' eyes, the gum That shines , For that once lost thou needst must fall To one, then prostitute to all: And we then have the transposed passage: Nor so immurd would I have Thee live, as dead, or in thy grave; But walk abroad, yet wisely well Keep 'gainst my coming sentinel. And think each man thou seest doth doom Thy thoughts to say, I back am come. Farther on we have the rather pretty variant: Let them call thee wondrous fair, Crown of women , yet despair. Let thy dreams be only fed With this, that I am in thy bed. And then turning in that sphere, Waking findst me sleeping there. But if boundless lust must scale Thy fortress and must needs prevail 'Gainst thee and force a passage in, etc. A city here of heroes I have made Upon the rock whose firm foundation laid Shall never shrink; where, making thine abode, Live thou a Selden, that's a demi-god. Grow up in beauty, as thou dost begin, And be of all admired, Thomasine. Her feet beneath her petticoat, Like little mice stole in and out, As if they feared the light. That old sack Young Herrick took to entertain The Muses in a sprightly vein. I pinch the maids both black and blue; and Ben Jonson's Entertainment at Althorpe , etc. Prometheus, when first from heaven high He brought down fire, ere then on earth not seen, Fond of delight, a Satyr standing by Gave it a kiss, as it like sweet had been. The difference is the Satyr's lips, my heart, He for a time, I evermore, have smart. And chose their priest, ere we can cast off sloth: Though good things answer many good intents, Smell sweet, O ye flowers, in your native sweetness: When I love as some have told, Love I shall when I am old , O ye Graces! make me fit For the welcoming of it. Clean my rooms, as temples be, T' entertain that deity. Give me words wherewith to woo, Suppling and successful too; Winning postures, and, withal, Manners each way musical: Sweetness to allay my sour And unsmooth behaviour. For I know you have the skill Vines to prune, though not to kill, And of any wood ye see, You can make a Mercury. No more, my Silvia, do I mean to pray For those good days that ne'er will come away. I want belief; O gentle Silvia, be The patient saint, and send up vows for me. I cannot pipe as I was wont to do, Broke is my reed, hoarse is my singing, too; My wearied oat I'll hang upon the tree, And give it to the sylvan deity. Wilt thou my true friend be? Then love not mine, but me. Come then, and like two doves with silv'ry wings, Let our souls fly to th' shades where ever springs Sit smiling in the meads; where balm and oil, Roses and cassia crown the untill'd soil. Where no disease reigns, or infection comes To blast the air, but ambergris and gums This, that, and ev'ry thicket doth transpire, More sweet than storax from the hallowed fire, Where ev'ry tree a wealthy issue bears Of fragrant apples, blushing plums, or pears; And all the shrubs, with sparkling spangles, shew Like morning sunshine tinselling the dew. Here in green meadows sits eternal May, Purfling the margents, while perpetual day So double gilds the air, as that no night Can ever rust th' enamel of the light. Here, naked younglings, handsome striplings, run Their goals for virgins' kisses; which when done, Then unto dancing forth the learned round Commixed they meet, with endless roses crown'd. And here we'll sit on primrose-banks, and see Love's chorus led by Cupid; and we'll be Two loving followers, too, unto the grove Where poets sing the stories of our love. There thou shalt hear divine Musus sing Of Hero and Leander; then I'll bring Thee to the stand, where honour'd Homer reads His Odysseys and his high Iliads; About whose throne the crowd of poets throng To hear the incantation of his tongue: To Linus, then to Pindar; and that done, I'll bring thee, Herrick, to Anacreon, Quaffing his full-crown'd bowls of burning wine, And in his raptures speaking lines of thine, Like to his subject; and as his frantic Looks show him truly Bacchanalian-like Besmear'd with grapes, welcome he shall thee thither, Where both may rage, both drink and dance together. Then stately Virgil, witty Ovid, by Whom fair Corinna sits, and doth comply With ivory wrists his laureate head, and steeps His eye in dew of kisses while he sleeps; Then soft Catullus, sharp-fang'd Martial, And towering Lucan, Horace, Juvenal, And snaky Persius, these, and those, whom rage Dropt for the jars of heaven fill'd t' engage All times unto their frenzies, thou shalt there Behold them in a spacious theatre. Among which glories, crowned with sacred bays And flatt'ring ivy, two recite their plays Beaumont and Fletcher, swans to whom all ears Listen, while they, like syrens in their spheres, Sing their Evadne; and still more for thee There yet remains to know than thou can'st see By glim'ring of a fancy. Do but come, And there I'll show thee that capacious room In which thy father Jonson now is plac'd, As in a globe of radiant fire, and grac'd To be in that orb crown'd, that doth include Those prophets of the former magnitude, And he one chief; but hark, I hear the cock The bellman of the night proclaim the clock Of late struck one, and now I see the prime Of day break from the pregnant east: 'tis time I vanish; more I had to say, But night determines here, away. Life is the body's light, which once declining, Those crimson clouds i' th' cheek and lips leave shining. Those counter-changed tabbies in the air The sun once set all of one colour are. So, when Death comes, fresh tinctures lose their place, And dismal darkness then doth smutch the face. Let fair or foul my mistress be, Or low, or tall, she pleaseth me; Or let her walk, or stand, or sit, The posture hers, I'm pleas'd with it; Or let her tongue be still, or stir, Graceful is every thing from her; Or let her grant, or else deny, My love will fit each history . Ask me why I send you here This sweet Infanta of the year? Ask me why I send to you This primrose, thus bepearl'd with dew? I will whisper to your ears: The sweets of love are mix'd with tears. Ask me why this flower does show So yellow-green, and sickly too? Ask me why the stalk is weak And bending yet it doth not break ? I will answer: These discover What fainting hopes are in a lover. If nine times you your bridegroom kiss, The tenth you know the parson's is. Pay then your tithe, and doing thus, Prove in your bride-bed numerous. If children you have ten, Sir John Won't for his tenth part ask you one. Bring me my rosebuds, drawer, come; So, while I thus sit crown'd, I'll drink the aged Ccubum, Until the roof turn round. All things subjected are to fate; Whom this morn sees most fortunate, The evening sees in poor estate. The saints'-bell calls, and, Julia, I must read The proper lessons for the saints now dead: To grace which service, Julia, there shall be One holy collect said or sung for thee. Dead when thou art, dear Julia, thou shalt have A trentall sung by virgins o'er thy grave: Meantime we two will sing the dirge of these, Who dead, deserve our best remembrances. I do love I know not what, Sometimes this and sometimes that; All conditions I aim at. But, as luckless, I have yet Many shrewd disasters met To gain her whom I would get. Therefore now I'll love no more As I've doted heretofore: He who must be, shall be poor. Night hides our thefts, all faults then pardon'd be; All are alike fair when no spots we see. Lais and Lucrece in the night-time are Pleasing alike, alike both singular: Joan and my lady have at that time one, One and the self-same priz'd complexion: Then please alike the pewter and the plate, The chosen ruby, and the reprobate. If so be a toad be laid In a sheep's-skin newly flay'd, And that tied to man, 'twill sever Him and his affections ever. For being comely, consonant, and free To most of men, but most of all to me; For so decreeing that thy clothes' expense Keeps still within a just circumference; Then for contriving so to load thy board As that the messes ne'er o'erlade the lord; Next for ordaining that thy words not swell To any one unsober syllable: These I could praise thee for beyond another, Wert thou a Winstfield only, not a brother. My head doth ache, O Sappho! take Thy fillet, And bind the pain, Or bring some bane To kill it. But less that part Than my poor heart Now is sick; One kiss from thee Will counsel be And physic. Live by thy muse thou shalt, when others die Leaving no fame to long posterity: When monarchies trans-shifted are, and gone, Here shall endure thy vast dominion. Hence a blessed soul is fled, Leaving here the body dead; Which since here they can't combine, For the saint we'll keep the shrine. O times most bad, Without the scope Of hope Of better to be had! Where shall I go, Or whither run To shun This public overthrow? No places are, This I am sure, In this our wasting war. Some storms we've past, Yet we must all Down fall, And perish at the last. Nothing can be more loathsome than to see Power conjoin'd with Nature's cruelty. I ask'd my Lucia but a kiss, And she with scorn denied me this; Say then, how ill should I have sped, Had I then ask'd her maidenhead? Little you are, for woman's sake be proud; For my sake next, though little, be not loud. He who has suffered shipwreck fears to sail Upon the seas, though with a gentle gale. A long life's-day I've taken pains For very little, or no gains; The evening's come, here now I'll stop, And work no more, but shut up shop. Be bold, my book, nor be abash'd, or fear The cutting thumb-nail or the brow severe; But by the Muses swear all here is good If but well read, or, ill read, understood. When I a verse shall make, Know I have pray'd thee, For old religion's sake, Make the way smooth for me, Honouring thee, on my knee Offer my lyric. Candles I'll give to thee, And a new altar, And thou, Saint Ben, shall be Give Want her welcome if she comes; we find Riches to be but burdens to the mind. Who with a little cannot be content, Endures an everlasting punishment. Let's live with that small pittance that we have; Who covets more, is evermore a slave . When laws full power have to sway, we see Little or no part there of tyranny. I'll get me hence, Because no fence Or fort that I can make here, But love by charms, Or else by arms Will storm, or starving take here. Go woo young Charles no more to look Than but to read this in my book: How Herrick begs, if that he can- Not like the muse, to love the man, Who by the shepherds sung, long since, The star-led birth of Charles the Prince. Dull to myself, and almost dead to these My many fresh and fragrant mistresses; Lost to all music now, since everything Puts on the semblance here of sorrowing. Sick is the land to the heart, and doth endure More dangerous faintings by her desp'rate cure. But if that golden age would come again, And Charles here rule, as he before did reign; If smooth and unperplexed the seasons were, As when the sweet Maria lived here: I should delight to have my curls half drown'd In Tyrian dews, and head with roses crown'd; And once more yet, ere I am laid out dead, Knock at a star with my exalted head . Thy sooty godhead I desire Still to be ready with thy fire; That should my book despised be, Acceptance it might find of thee. This is the height of justice: that to do Thyself which thou put'st other men unto. As great men lead, the meaner follow on, Or to the good, or evil action. No wrath of men or rage of seas Can shake a just man's purposes: No threats of tyrants or the grim Visage of them can alter him; But what he doth at first intend, That he holds firmly to the end. Come, sit we under yonder tree, Where merry as the maids we'll be; And as on primroses we sit, We'll venture, if we can, at wit: If not, at draw-gloves we will play; So spend some minutes of the day: Or else spin out the thread of sands, Or tell what strange tricks love can do, By quickly making one of two. Thus we will sit and talk, but tell No cruel truths of Philomel, Or Phyllis, whom hard fate forc'd on To kill herself for Demophon. But fables we'll relate: how Jove Put on all shapes to get a love; As now a satyr, then a swan; A bull but then, and now a man. Next we will act how young men woo, And sigh, and kiss as lovers do; And talk of brides, and who shall make That wedding-smock, this bridal cake, That dress, this sprig, that leaf, this vine, That smooth and silken columbine. This done, we'll draw lots who shall buy And gild the bays and rosemary; What posies for our wedding rings; What gloves we'll give and ribandings: And smiling at ourselves, decree, Who then the joining priest shall be. What short, sweet prayers shall be said; And how the posset shall be made With cream of lilies, not of kine, And maiden's-blush, for spiced wine. Thus, having talked, we'll next commend A kiss to each, and so we'll end. As wearied pilgrims, once possest Of long'd-for lodging, go to rest, So I, now having rid my way, Fix here my button'd staff and stay. Youth, I confess, hath me misled; But age hath brought me right to bed. Spring with the lark, most comely bride, and meet Your eager bridegroom with auspicious feet. The morn's far spent, and the immortal sun Corals his cheek to see those rites not done. Fie, lovely maid! indeed you are too slow, When to the temple Love should run, not go. Dispatch your dressing then, and quickly wed; Then feast, and coy't a little, then to bed. This day is Love's day, and this busy night Is yours, in which you challenged are to fight With such an arm'd, but such an easy foe, As will, if you yield, lie down conquer'd too. The field is pitch'd, but such must be your wars, As that your kisses must outvie the stars. Fall down together vanquished both, and lie Drown'd in the blood of rubies there, not die. Her eyes the glow-worm lend thee, The shooting stars attend thee; And the elves also, Whose little eyes glow Like the sparks of fire, befriend thee. No Will-o'-th'-Wisp mislight thee, Nor snake or slow-worm bite thee; But on, on thy way Not making a stay, Since ghost there's none to affright thee. Let not the dark thee cumber: What though the moon does slumber? The stars of the night Will lend thee their light Like tapers clear without number. Then, Julia, let me woo thee, Thus, thus to come unto me; And when I shall meet Thy silv'ry feet My soul I'll pour into thee. Give me wine, and give me meat, To create in me a heat, That my pulses high may beat. Cold and hunger never yet Could a noble verse beget; But your bowls with sack replete. Give me these, my knight, and try In a minute's space how I Can run mad and prophesy. Then, if any piece prove new And rare, I'll say, my dearest Crew, It was full inspired by you. If well the dice run, let's applaud the cast: The happy fortune will not always last . What is a kiss? Why this, as some approve: The sure, sweet cement, glue, and lime of love. I make no haste to have my numbers read: Seldom comes glory till a man be dead . Wantons we are, and though our words be such, Our lives do differ from our lines by much. Reproach we may the living, not the dead: 'Tis cowardice to bite the buried . What will ye, my poor orphans, do When I must leave the world and you? Who'll give ye then a sheltering shed, Or credit ye when I am dead? Who'll let ye by their fire sit, Although ye have a stock of wit Already coin'd to pay for it? I cannot tell, unless there be Some race of old humanity Left, of the large heart and long hand, Alive, as noble Westmorland, Or gallant Newark, which brave two May fost'ring fathers be to you. If not, expect to be no less Ill us'd, than babes left fatherless. Dearest of thousands, now the time draws near That with my lines my life must full-stop here. Cut off thy hairs, and let thy tears be shed Over my turf when I am buried. Then for effusions, let none wanting be, Or other rites that do belong to me; As love shall help thee, when thou dost go hence Unto thy everlasting residence. In a dream, Love bade me go To the galleys there to row; In the vision I ask'd why? Love as briefly did reply, 'Twas better there to toil, than prove The turmoils they endure that love. I awoke, and then I knew What Love said was too-too true; Henceforth therefore I will be, As from love, from trouble free. None pities him that's in the snare, And, warned before, would not beware. Come sit we by the fire's side, And roundly drink we here; Till that we see our cheeks ale-dy'd And noses tann'd with beer. May a thousand blessings come! And a sweet concurring stream Of all joys to join with them. Make no long stay In thy sphere; But give thy place to Night, That she, As thee, May be Partaker of this sight. And since it was thy care To see the younglings wed, 'Tis fit that Night the pair Should see safe brought to bed. So as to rise still with an appetite. Love is a thing most nice, and must be fed To such a height, but never surfeited. What is beyond the mean is ever ill: 'Tis best to feed Love, but not overfill ; Go then discreetly to the bed of pleasure, And this remember, virtue keeps the measure . To encourage on the bride, And to these we have espi'd, Not a kissing Cupid flies Here about, but has his eyes To imply your love is wise. To make a piece Of cloth; Nor, fair, must you be both Your finger to apply To housewifery. Then, then begin To spin: And, sweetling, mark you, what a web will come Into your chests, drawn by your painful thumb. Rich by the ductile wool and flax. Yarn is an income, and the housewives' thread The larder fills with meat, the bin with bread. And not by any sordid shift; 'Tis haste Makes waste: Extremes have still their fault: The softest fire makes the sweetest malt: Who grips too hard the dry and slippery sand Holds none at all, or little in his hand. Give them the blessing of increase: And thou, Lucina, that dost hear The vows of those that children bear: Whenas her April hour draws near, Be thou then propitious there. The raven's years, go hence more ripe than old. One night i' th' year, my dearest beauties, come And bring those due drink-offerings to my tomb. When thence ye see my reverend ghost to rise, And there to lick th' effused sacrifice: Though paleness be the livery that I wear, Look ye not wan or colourless for fear. Trust me, I will not hurt ye, or once show The least grim look, or cast a frown on you: Nor shall the tapers when I'm there burn blue. This I may do, perhaps, as I glide by, Cast on my girls a glance and loving eye, Or fold mine arms and sigh, because I've lost The world so soon, and in it you the most. Than these, no fears more on your fancies fall, Though then I smile and speak no words at all. A crystal vial Cupid brought, Which had a juice in it; Of which who drank, he said no thought Of love he should admit. I, greedy of the prize, did drink, And emptied soon the glass; Which burnt me so, that I do think The fire of hell it was. Give me my earthen cups again, The crystal I contemn; Which, though enchas'd with pearls, contain A deadly draught in them. And thou, O Cupid! come not to My threshold, since I see, For all I have, or else can do, Thou still wilt cozen me. Please your Grace, from out your store, Give an alms to one that's poor, That your mickle may have more. Black I'm grown for want of meat Give me then an ant to eat, Or the cleft ear of a mouse Over-sour'd in drink of souce; Or, sweet lady, reach to me The abdomen of a bee; Or commend a cricket's hip, Or his huckson, to my scrip. Give for bread a little bit Of a pea that 'gins to chit, And my full thanks take for it. Flour of fuzz-balls, that's too good For a man in needihood; But the meal of milldust can Well content a craving man. Any orts the elves refuse Well will serve the beggar's use. But if this may seem too much For an alms, then give me such Little bits that nestle there In the prisoner's panier. So a blessing light upon You and mighty Oberon: That your plenty last till when I return your alms again. Let's be jocund while we may, All things have an ending day; And when once the work is done, Fates revolve no flax they've spun . Here a pretty baby lies Sung asleep with lullabies; Pray be silent, and not stir Th' easy earth that covers her. If Nature do deny Colours, let Art supply. Fled are the frosts, and now the fields appear Re-cloth'd in fresh and verdant diaper. Thaw'd are the snows, and now the lusty spring Gives to each mead a neat enamelling. The palms put forth their gems, and every tree Now swaggers in her leafy gallantry. The while the Daulian minstrel sweetly sings, With warbling notes, her Terean sufferings. What gentle winds perspire! As if here Never had been the northern plunderer To strip the trees and fields, to their distress, Leaving them to a pitied nakedness. And look how when a frantic storm doth tear A stubborn oak, or holm, long growing there, But lull'd to calmness, then succeeds a breeze That scarcely stirs the nodding leaves of trees: So when this war, which tempest-like doth spoil Our salt, our corn, our honey, wine and oil, Falls to a temper, and doth mildly cast His inconsiderate frenzy off, at last, The gentle dove may, when these turmoils cease, Bring in her bill, once more, the branch of peace. The hag is astride This night for to ride, The devil and she together; Through thick and through thin, Now out and then in, Though ne'er so foul be the weather. A thorn or a burr She takes for a spur, With a lash of a bramble she rides now; Through brakes and through briars, O'er ditches and mires, She follows the spirit that guides now. No beast for his food Dare now range the wood, But hush'd in his lair he lies lurking; While mischiefs, by these, On land and on seas, At noon of night are a-working. The storm will arise And trouble the skies; This night, and more for the wonder, The ghost from the tomb Affrighted shall come, Call'd out by the clap of the thunder. Tread, sirs, as lightly as ye can Upon the grave of this old man. Twice forty, bating but one year And thrice three weeks, he lived here. Whom gentle fate translated hence To a more happy residence. Yet, reader, let me tell thee this, Which from his ghost a promise is, If here ye will some few tears shed, He'll never haunt ye now he's dead. Tears, though they're here below the sinner's brine, Above they are the angels' spiced wine. Physicians fight not against men; but these Combat for men by conquering the disease. Our household-gods our parents be; And manners good require that we The first fruits give to them, who gave Us hands to get what here we have. Sound teeth has Lucy, pure as pearl, and small, With mellow lips, and luscious therewithal. I am holy while I stand Circum-crost by thy pure hand; But when that is gone, again I, as others, am profane. When I go hence, ye Closet-Gods, I fear Never again to have ingression here Where I have had whatever thing could be Pleasant and precious to my muse and me. Besides rare sweets, I had a book which none Could read the intext but myself alone. About the cover of this book there went A curious-comely clean compartlement, And, in the midst, to grace it more, was set A blushing, pretty, peeping rubelet. But now 'tis closed; and being shut and seal'd, Be it, O be it, never more reveal'd! Keep here still, Closet-Gods, 'fore whom I've set Oblations oft of sweetest marmelet. Fill me a mighty bowl Up to the brim, That I may drink Unto my Jonson's soul. Crown it again, again; And thrice repeat That happy heat, To drink to thee, my Ben. Well I can quaff, I see, To th' number five Or nine; but thrive In frenzy ne'er like thee. Though long it be, years may repay the debt; None loseth that which he in time may get . Drink wine, and live here blitheful, while ye may: The morrow's life too late is; live to-day . No man comes late unto that place from whence Never man yet had a regredience. O you the virgins nine! That do our souls incline To noble discipline! Nod to this vow of mine. Come, then, and now inspire My viol and my lyre With your eternal fire, And make me one entire Composer in your choir. Then I'll your altars strew With roses sweet and new; And ever live a true Acknowledger of you. I'll sing no more, nor will I longer write Of that sweet lady, or that gallant knight. I'll sing no more of frosts, snows, dews and showers; No more of groves, meads, springs and wreaths of flowers. I'll write no more, nor will I tell or sing Of Cupid and his witty cozening: I'll sing no more of death, or shall the grave No more my dirges and my trentalls have. Who read'st this book that I have writ, And can'st not mend but carp at it; By all the Muses! thou shalt be In ways to greatness, think on this, That slippery all ambition is . Sweet country life, to such unknown Whose lives are others', not their own! But serving courts and cities, be Less happy, less enjoying thee. Thou never plough'st the ocean's foam To seek and bring rough pepper home; Nor to the Eastern Ind dost rove To bring from thence the scorched clove; Nor, with the loss of thy lov'd rest, Bring'st home the ingot from the West. No, thy ambition's masterpiece Flies no thought higher than a fleece; Or how to pay thy hinds, and clear All scores, and so to end the year: But walk'st about thine own dear bounds, Not envying others larger grounds: For well thou know'st 'tis not th' extent Of land makes life, but sweet content . When now the cock the ploughman's horn Calls forth the lily-wristed morn, Then to thy corn-fields thou dost go, Which though well soil'd, yet thou dost know That the best compost for the lands Is the wise master's feet and hands. There at the plough thou find'st thy team With a hind whistling there to them; And cheer'st them up by singing how The kingdom's portion is the plough. This done, then to th' enamelled meads Thou go'st, and as thy foot there treads, Thou see'st a present God-like power Imprinted in each herb and flower; And smell'st the breath of great-ey'd kine, Sweet as the blossoms of the vine. Here thou behold'st thy large sleek neat Unto the dew-laps up in meat; And, as thou look'st, the wanton steer, The heifer, cow, and ox draw near To make a pleasing pastime there. These seen, thou go'st to view thy flocks Of sheep, safe from the wolf and fox, And find'st their bellies there as full Of short sweet grass as backs with wool, And leav'st them, as they feed and fill, A shepherd piping on a hill. For sports, for pageantry and plays Thou hast thy eves and holidays; On which the young men and maids meet To exercise their dancing feet; Tripping the comely country round, With daffodils and daisies crown'd. Thy wakes, thy quintels here thou hast, Thy May-poles, too, with garlands grac'd; Thy morris dance, thy Whitsun ale, Thy shearing feast which never fail; Thy harvest-home, thy wassail bowl, That's toss'd up after fox i' th' hole; Thy mummeries, thy Twelfth-tide kings And queens, thy Christmas revellings, Thy nut-brown mirth, thy russet wit, And no man pays too dear for it. To these, thou hast thy times to go And trace the hare i' th' treacherous snow; Thy witty wiles to draw, and get The lark into the trammel net; Thou hast thy cockrood and thy glade To take the precious pheasant made; Thy lime-twigs, snares and pit-falls then To catch the pilfering birds, not men. O happy life! if that their good The husbandmen but understood! Who all the day themselves do please, And younglings, with such sports as these, And lying down have nought t' affright Sweet sleep, that makes more short the night. I dare not ask a kiss, I dare not beg a smile, Lest having that, or this, I might grow proud the while. No, no, the utmost share Of my desire shall be Only to kiss that air That lately kissed thee. When after many lusters thou shalt be Wrapt up in sear-cloth with thine ancestry; When of thy ragg'd escutcheons shall be seen So little left, as if they ne'er had been; Thou shalt thy name have, and thy fame's best trust, Here with the generation of my Just. Be the mistress of my choice Clean in manners, clear in voice; Be she witty more than wise, Pure enough, though not precise; Be she showing in her dress Like a civil wilderness; That the curious may detect Order in a sweet neglect; Be she rolling in her eye, Tempting all the passers-by; And each ringlet of her hair An enchantment, or a snare For to catch the lookers-on; But herself held fast by none. Thais in the night to me. Be she such as neither will Famish me, nor overfill . Grow for two ends, it matters not at all, Be 't for my bridal or my burial. Crab faces gowns with sundry furs; 'tis known He keeps the fox fur for to face his own. Is this a life, to break thy sleep, To rise as soon as day doth peep? To tire thy patient ox or ass By noon, and let thy good days pass, Not knowing this, that Jove decrees Some mirth t' adulce man's miseries? No; 'tis a life to have thine oil Without extortion from thy soil; Thy faithful fields to yield thee grain, Although with some, yet little, pain; To have thy mind, and nuptial bed, With fears and cares uncumbered; A pleasing wife, that by thy side Lies softly panting like a bride. This is to live, and to endear Those minutes Time has lent us here. Then, while fates suffer, live thou free As is that air that circles thee, And crown thy temples too, and let Thy servant, not thy own self, sweat, To strut thy barns with sheafs of wheat. Time steals away like to a stream, And we glide hence away with them. No sound recalls the hours once fled, Or roses, being withered ; Nor us, my friend, when we are lost, Like to a dew or melted frost. Then live we mirthful while we should, And turn the iron age to gold. Let's feast, and frolic, sing, and play, And thus less last than live our day. Whose life with care is overcast, That man's not said to live, but last; Nor is't a life, seven years to tell, But for to live that half seven well; And that we'll do, as men who know, Some few sands spent, we hence must go, Both to be blended in the urn From whence there's never a return. Thousands each day pass by, which we, Once past and gone, no more shall see. This axiom I have often heard, Kings ought to be more lov'd than fear'd . Or look'd I back unto the times hence flown To praise those Muses and dislike our own Or did I walk those Pan-gardens through, To kick the flowers and scorn their odours too I might, and justly, be reputed here One nicely mad or peevishly severe. But by Apollo! as I worship wit, Where I have cause to burn perfumes to it; So, I confess, 'tis somewhat to do well In our high art, although we can't excel Like thee, or dare the buskins to unloose Of thy brave, bold, and sweet Maronian muse. But since I'm call'd, rare Denham, to be gone, Take from thy Herrick this conclusion: 'Tis dignity in others, if they be Crown'd poets, yet live princes under thee; The while their wreaths and purple robes do shine Less by their own gems than those beams of thine. It was, and still my care is, To worship ye, the Lares, With crowns of greenest parsley And garlic chives, not scarcely; For favours here to warm me, And not by fire to harm me; For gladding so my hearth here With inoffensive mirth here; That while the wassail bowl here With North-down ale doth troul here, No syllable doth fall here To mar the mirth at all here. For which, O chimney-keepers! I dare not call ye sweepers So long as I am able To keep a country table, Great be my fare, or small cheer, I'll eat and drink up all here. Women, although they ne'er so goodly make it, Their fashion is, but to say no, to take it. Love is maintain'd by wealth ; when all is spent, Adversity then breeds the discontent . Tumble me down, and I will sit Upon my ruins, smiling yet; Tear me to tatters, yet I'll be Patient in my necessity. Laugh at my scraps of clothes, and shun Me, as a fear'd infection; Yet, scare-crow-like, I'll walk as one Neglecting thy derision. Come, Anthea, know thou this, Love at no time idle is ; Let's be doing, though we play But at push-pin half the day; Chains of sweet bents let us make Captive one, or both, to take: In which bondage we will lie, Souls transfusing thus, and die. Nero commanded; but withdrew his eyes From the beholding death and cruelties. Hast thou begun an act? ne'er then give o'er: No man despairs to do what's done before . What offspring other men have got, The how, where, when, I question not. These are the children I have left, Adopted some, none got by theft; But all are touch'd, like lawful plate, And no verse illegitimate. Kings must not oft be seen by public eyes: State at a distance adds to dignities . Health is no other, as the learned hold, But a just measure both of heat and cold. I'll to thee a simnel bring, 'Gainst thou go'st a-mothering: So that when she blesseth thee, Half that blessing thou'lt give me. Give way, give way! now, now my Charles shines here A public light, in this immensive sphere; Some stars were fix'd before, but these are dim Compar'd, in this my ample orb, to him. Draw in your feeble fires, while that he Appears but in his meaner majesty. Where, if such glory flashes from his name, Which is his shade, who can abide his flame! Princes, and such like public lights as these, Must not be look'd on but at distances: For, if we gaze on these brave lamps too near, Our eyes they'll blind, or if not blind, they'll blear. The rose was sick, and smiling died; And, being to be sanctified, About the bed there sighing stood The sweet and flowery sisterhood. Some hung the head, while some did bring, To wash her, water from the spring. Some laid her forth, while others wept, But all a solemn fast there kept. The holy sisters, some among, The sacred dirge and trentall sung. But ah! what sweets smelt everywhere, As heaven had spent all perfumes there. At last, when prayers for the dead And rites were all accomplished, They, weeping, spread a lawny loom And clos'd her up, as in a tomb. Mine eyes, like clouds, were drizzling rain; And as they thus did entertain The gentle beams from Julia's sight To mine eyes levell'd opposite, O thing admir'd! there did appear A curious rainbow smiling there; Which was the covenant that she No more would drown mine eyes or me. Though by well warding many blows we've pass'd, That stroke most fear'd is which is struck the last . Fortune's a blind profuser of her own, Too much she gives to some, enough to none. At stool-ball, Lucia, let us play For sugar-cakes and wine: Or for a tansy let us pay, The loss, or thine, or mine. If thou, my dear, a winner be At trundling of the ball, The wager thou shall have, and me, And my misfortunes all. But if, my sweetest, I shall get, Then I desire but this: That likewise I may pay the bet And have for all a kiss. Let us now take time and play, Love, and live here while we may; Drink rich wine, and make good cheer, While we have our being here; For once dead and laid i' th' grave, No return from thence we have. Prat he writes satires, but herein's the fault, In no one satire there's a mite of salt. At post and pair, or slam, Tom Tuck would play This Christmas, but his want wherewith says nay. Who, railing, drives the lazar from his door, Instead of alms, sets dogs upon the poor. The May-pole is up! Now give me the cup, I'll drink to the garlands around it; But first unto those Whose hands did compose The glory of flowers that crown'd it. A health to my girls, Whose husbands may earls Or lords be, granting my wishes, And when that ye wed To the bridal bed, Then multiply all like to fishes. That flow of gallants which approach To kiss thy hand from out the coach; That fleet of lackeys which do run Before thy swift postillion; Those strong-hoof'd mules which we behold Rein'd in with purple, pearl, and gold, And shod with silver, prove to be The drawers of the axletree. Thy wife, thy children, and the state Of Persian looms and antique plate; All these, and more, shall then afford No joy to thee, their sickly lord. Adversity hurts none, but only such Whom whitest fortune dandled has too much. Need is no vice at all, though here it be With men a loathed inconveniency. Sorrows divided amongst many, less Discruciate a man in deep distress. I press'd my Julia's lips, and in the kiss Her soul and love were palpable in this. Nothing hard or harsh can prove Unto those that truly love. By the weak'st means things mighty are o'erthrown. He's lord of thy life who contemns his own . I brake thy bracelet 'gainst my will, And, wretched, I did see Thee discomposed then, and still Art discontent with me. One gem was lost, and I will get A richer pearl for thee, Than ever, dearest Silvia, yet Was drunk to Antony. Or, for revenge, I'll tell thee what Thou for the breach shall do; First crack the strings, and after that Cleave thou my heart in two. 'Tis said, as Cupid danc'd among The gods he down the nectar flung, Which on the white rose being shed Made it for ever after red. Men are not born kings, but are men renown'd; Chose first, confirm'd next, and at last are crown'd. Preposterous is that order, when we run To ask our wages ere our work be done. Knew'st thou one month would take thy life away, Thou'dst weep; but laugh, should it not last a day. Glory no other thing is, Tully says, Than a man's frequent fame spoke out with praise. Those possessions short-liv'd are, Into the which we come by war. From the dull confines of the drooping West To see the day spring from the pregnant East, Ravish'd in spirit I come, nay, more, I fly To thee, bless'd place of my nativity! Thus, thus with hallowed foot I touch the ground, With thousand blessings by thy fortune crown'd. O fruitful Genius! that bestowest here An everlasting plenty, year by year. O place! O people! Manners! fram'd to please All nations, customs, kindreds, languages! I am a free-born Roman; suffer, then, That I amongst you live a citizen. London my home is: though by hard fate sent Into a long and irksome banishment; Yet since call'd back; henceforward let me be, O native country, repossess'd by thee! For, rather than I'll to the West return, I'll beg of thee first here to have mine urn. Weak I am grown, and must in short time fall; Give thou my sacred relics burial. 'Tis not ev'ry day that I Fitted am to prophesy; No; but when the spirit fills The fantastic pannicles Full of fire, then I write As the godhead doth indite. Thus enrag'd, my lines are hurled, Like the Sybil's, through the world. Look how next the holy fire Either slakes, or doth retire; So the fancy cools, till when That brave spirit comes again. To mortal men great loads allotted be, But of all packs, no pack like poverty . A wager who the best shall play, Of thee or I, the roundelay That fits the business of the day. And Lalage the judge shall be, To give the prize to thee, or me. A heifer smooth, and black as jet, In every part alike complete, And wanton as a kid as yet. And Lalage, with cow-like eyes, Shall be disposeress of the prize. Lay to thy stake a lusty steer With gilded horns, and burnish'd clear. Why, then, begin, and let us hear The soft, the sweet, the mellow note That gently purls from either's oat. Each one to make his melody. The equal umpire shall be I, Who'll hear, and so judge righteously. Much time is spent in prate; begin, And sooner play, the sooner win. Thou art a man of worthiness; But hark how I can now express My love unto my neatherdess. He sings A sugar'd note! and sound as sweet As kine when they at milking meet. I'll strike thee such a nimble air That thou shalt say thyself 'tis rare, And title me without compare. Lay by a while your pipes, and rest, Since both have here deserved best. I'll play thee such another strain That thou shalt swear my pipe does reign Over thine oat as sovereign. He sings And Lalage shall tell by this, Whose now the prize and wager is. And hadst thou wager'd twenty kine, They were mine own. Lal. In love combine. And lay ye down your pipes together, As weary, not o'ercome by either. 'Tis not the walls or purple that defends A prince from foes, but 'tis his fort of friends. As many laws and lawyers do express Nought but a kingdom's ill-affectedness; Even so, those streets and houses do but show Store of diseases where physicians flow. Would ye oil of blossoms get? Take it from my Julia's sweat: Oil of lilies and of spike? From her moisture take the like. Let her breathe, or let her blow, All rich spices thence will flow. You see this gentle stream that glides, Shov'd on by quick-succeeding tides; Try if this sober stream you can Follow to th' wilder ocean; And see if there it keeps unspent In that congesting element. Next, from that world of waters, then By pores and caverns back again Induct that inadult'rate same Stream to the spring from whence it came. This with a wonder when ye do, As easy, and else easier too, Then may ye recollect the grains Of my particular remains, After a thousand lusters hurl'd By ruffling winds about the world. 'Tis still observ'd that fame ne'er sings The order, but the sum of things. Oft bend the bow, and thou with ease shalt do What others can't with all their strength put to. Command the roof, great Genius, and from thence Into this house pour down thy influence, That through each room a golden pipe may run Of living water by thy benison. Fulfill the larders, and with strengthening bread Be evermore these bins replenished. Next, like a bishop consecrate my ground, That lucky fairies here may dance their round; And after that, lay down some silver pence The master's charge and care to recompense. Charm then the chambers, make the beds for ease, More than for peevish, pining sicknesses. Fix the foundation fast, and let the roof Grow old with time but yet keep weather-proof. Though clock, To tell how night draws hence, I've none, A cock I have to sing how day draws on. I have A maid, my Prew, by good luck sent To save That little Fates me gave or lent. A hen I keep, which creeking day by day, Tells when She goes her long white egg to lay. A goose I have, which with a jealous ear Lets loose Her tongue to tell that danger's near. A lamb I keep, tame, with my morsels fed, An orphan left him, lately dead. A cat I keep that plays about my house, With eating many a miching mouse. To these A Tracy I do keep whereby I please The more my rural privacy; But toys to give my heart some ease; Where care None is, slight things do lightly please. In all thy need be thou possess'd Still with a well-prepared breast; Nor let the shackles make thee sad; Thou canst but have what others had. And this for comfort thou must know Times that are ill won't still be so. Clouds will not ever pour down rain; A sullen day will clear again . First peals of thunder we must hear, Then lutes and harps shall stroke the ear. When all birds else do of their music fail, Money's the still sweet-singing nightingale. Begin with a kiss, Go on too with this; And thus, thus, thus let us smother Our lips for awhile, But let's not beguile Our hope of one for the other. This play, be assur'd, Long enough has endur'd, Since more and more is exacted; For Love he doth call For his uptails all ; And that's the part to be acted. And prettily bedabbled so, Her clothes held up, she showed withal Her decent legs, clean, long, and small. I follow'd after to descry Part of the nak'd sincerity; But still the envious scene between Denied the mask I would have seen. By tears and pity now to come unto me. What voice so sweet and charming do I hear? Say what thou art. I prithee first draw near. A sound I hear, but nothing yet can see; Speak, where thou art. O Charon pity me! I am a bird, and though no name I tell, My warbling note will say I'm Philomel. What's that to me? I waft nor fish or fowls, Nor beasts, fond thing, but only human souls. Alas for me! Shame on thy witching note That made me thus hoist sail and bring my boat: But I'll return; what mischief brought thee hither? A deal of love and much, much grief together. What's thy request? That since she's now beneath Who fed my life, I'll follow her in death. And is that all? I'm gone. By love I pray thee. Talk not of love; all pray, but few souls pay me. I'll give thee vows and tears. Ch. Can tears pay scores For mending sails, for patching boat and oars? I'll beg a penny, or I'll sing so long Till thou shalt say I've paid thee with a song. Why then begin; and all the while we make Our slothful passage o'er the Stygian Lake, Thou and I'll sing to make these dull shades merry, Who else with tears would doubtless drown my ferry. She's now beneath , her mother Zeuxippe? A little saint best fits a little shrine, A little prop best fits a little vine: As my small cruse best fits my little wine. A little seed best fits a little soil, A little trade best fits a little toil: As my small jar best fits my little oil. A little bin best fits a little bread, A little garland fits a little head: As my small stuff best fits my little shed. A little hearth best fits a little fire, A little chapel fits a little choir: As my small bell best fits my little spire. A little stream best fits a little boat, A little lead best fits a little float: As my small pipe best fits my little note. A little meat best fits a little belly, As sweetly, lady, give me leave to tell ye, This little pipkin fits this little jelly. Thrice happy roses, so much grac'd to have Within the bosom of my love your grave. Die when ye will, your sepulchre is known, Your grave her bosom is, the lawn the stone. Maids' nays are nothing, they are shy But to desire what they deny. The gods require the thighs Of beeves for sacrifice; Which roasted, we the steam Must sacrifice to them, Who though they do not eat, Yet love the smell of meat. A gyges' ring they bear about them still, To be, and not seen when and where they will. They tread on clouds, and though they sometimes fall, They fall like dew, but make no noise at all. So silently they one to th' other come, As colours steal into the pear or plum, And air-like, leave no pression to be seen Where'er they met or parting place has been. Gyges' ring , which made the wearer invisible. Close keep your lips, if that you mean To be accounted inside clean: For if you cleave them we shall see There in your teeth much leprosy. O Jupiter, should I speak ill Of woman-kind, first die I will; Since that I know, 'mong all the rest Of creatures, woman is the best. To gather flowers Sappha went, And homeward she did bring Within her lawny continent The treasure of the spring. She smiling blush'd, and blushing smil'd, And sweetly blushing thus, She look'd as she'd been got with child By young Favonius. Her apron gave, as she did pass, An odour more divine, More pleasing, too, than ever was White as Zenobia's teeth, the which the girls Of Rome did wear for their most precious pearls. She wept upon her cheeks, and weeping so, She seem'd to quench love's fire that there did glow. She by the river sat, and sitting there, She wept, and made it deeper by a tear. Break off delay, since we but read of one That ever prospered by cunctation. Stand forth, brave man, since fate has made thee here The Hector over aged Exeter, Who for a long, sad time has weeping stood Like a poor lady lost in widowhood, But fears not now to see her safety sold, As other towns and cities were, for gold By those ignoble births which shame the stem That gave progermination unto them: Whose restless ghosts shall hear their children sing, Our sires betrayed their country and their king. True, if this city seven times rounded was With rock, and seven times circumflank'd with brass, Yet if thou wert not, Berkley, loyal proof, The senators, down tumbling with the roof, Would into prais'd, but pitied, ruins fall, Leaving no show where stood the capitol. But thou art just and itchless, and dost please Thy Genius with two strengthening buttresses, Faith and affection, which will never slip To weaken this thy great dictatorship. Love love begets, then never be Unsoft to him who's smooth to thee. Tigers and bears, I've heard some say, For proffer'd love will love repay: None are so harsh, but if they find Softness in others, will be kind; Affection will affection move, Then you must like because I love. Hast thou attempted greatness? then go on: Back-turning slackens resolution. Discreet and prudent we that discord call That either profits, or not hurts at all. Consult ere thou begin'st; that done, go on With all wise speed for execution. consulueris, mature facto opus est, Cat. i. Whatsoever thing I see, Rich or poor although it be; 'Tis a mistress unto me. Be my girl or fair or brown, Does she smile or does she frown, Still I write a sweetheart down. Be she rough or smooth of skin; When I touch I then begin For to let affection in. Be she bald, or does she wear Locks incurl'd of other hair, I shall find enchantment there. Be she whole, or be she rent, So my fancy be content, She's to me most excellent. Be she fat, or be she lean, I'm a man for ev'ry scene. Other men's sins we ever bear in mind; If little labour, little are our gains: Man's fortunes are according to his pains. By so much, virtue is the less, By how much, near to singleness. A wanton and lascivious eye Betrays the heart's adultery. What fate decreed, time now has made us see, A renovation of the west by thee. That preternatural fever, which did threat Death to our country, now hath lost his heat, And, calms succeeding, we perceive no more Th' unequal pulse to beat, as heretofore. Something there yet remains for thee to do; Then reach those ends that thou wast destin'd to. Go on with Sylla's fortune; let thy fate Make thee like him, this, that way fortunate: Apollo's image side with thee to bless Thy war discreetly made with white success. Meantime thy prophets watch by watch shall pray, While young Charles fights, and fighting wins the day: That done, our smooth-paced poems all shall be Sung in the high doxology of thee. Then maids shall strew thee, and thy curls from them Receive with songs a flowery diadem. Burn, or drown me, choose ye whether, So I may but die together; Thus to slay me by degrees Is the height of cruelties. What needs twenty stabs, when one Strikes me dead as any stone? O show mercy then, and be Kind at once to murder me. Princes and fav'rites are most dear, while they By giving and receiving hold the play; But the relation then of both grows poor, When these can ask, and kings can give no more. Examples lead us, and we likely see; Such as the prince is, will his people be. Love and the Graces evermore do wait Upon the man that is a potentate. Go to feast, as others do. Are the junkets still at wakes: Unto which the tribes resort, Where the business is the sport. Morris-dancers thou shall see, Marian, too, in pageantry, And a mimic to devise Many grinning properties. Players there will be, and those Base in action as in clothes; Yet with strutting they will please The incurious villages. Near the dying of the day There will be a cudgel-play, Where a coxcomb will be broke Ere a good word can be spoke: But the anger ends all here, Drenched in ale, or drown'd in beer. Happy rustics! best content With the cheapest merriment, And possess no other fear Than to want the wake next year. Fresh strewings allow To my sepulchre now, To make my lodging the sweeter; A staff or a wand Put then in my hand, With a penny to pay S. Peter. Who has not a cross Must sit with the loss, And no whit further must venture; Since the porter he Will paid have his fee, Or else not one there must enter. Who at a dead lift Can't send for a gift A pig to the priest for a roaster, Shall hear his clerk say, By yea and by nay, Nor art thou less esteem'd that I have plac'd, Amongst mine honour'd, thee almost the last: In great processions many lead the way To him who is the triumph of the day, As these have done to thee who art the one, One only glory of a million: In whom the spirit of the gods does dwell, Firing thy soul, by which thou dost foretell When this or that vast dynasty must fall Down to a fillet more imperial; When this or that horn shall be broke, and when Others shall spring up in their place again; When times and seasons and all years must lie Drowned in the sea of wild eternity; When the black doomsday books, as yet unseal'd, Shall by the mighty angel be reveal'd; And when the trumpet which thou late hast found Shall call to judgment. Tell us when the sound Of this or that great April day shall be, And next the Gospel we will credit thee. Meantime like earth-worms we will crawl below, And wonder at those things that thou dost know. Here lies a virgin, and as sweet As e'er was wrapt in winding sheet. Her name if next you would have known, The marble speaks it, Mary Stone: Who dying in her blooming years, This stone for name's sake melts to tears. If, fragrant virgins, you'll but keep A fast, while jets and marbles weep, And praying, strew some roses on her, You'll do my niece abundant honour. Of both our fortunes good and bad we find Prosperity more searching of the mind: Felicity flies o'er the wall and fence, While misery keeps in with patience. Time is the bound of things; where'er we go Fate gives a meeting, Death's the end of woe . By those soft tods of wool With which the air is full; By all those tinctures there, That paint the hemisphere; By dews and drizzling rain That swell the golden grain; By all those sweets that be I' th' flowery nunnery; By silent nights, and the Three forms of Hecate; By all aspects that bless The sober sorceress, While juice she strains, and pith To make her philters with; By time that hastens on Things to perfection; And by yourself, the best Conjurement of the rest: In love with none, but me. I cannot love as I have lov'd before; For I'm grown old and, with mine age, grown poor. Love must be fed by wealth : this blood of mine Must needs wax cold, if wanting bread and wine. Holy water come and bring; Cast in salt, for seasoning: Set the brush for sprinkling: Sacred spittle bring ye hither; Meal and it now mix together, And a little oil to either. Give the tapers here their light, Ring the saints'-bell, to affright Far from hence the evil sprite. Give me a cell To dwell, Where no foot hath A path: There will I spend And end My wearied years In tears. A Master of a house, as I have read, Must be the first man up, and last in bed. With the sun rising he must walk his grounds; See this, view that, and all the other bounds: Shut every gate; mend every hedge that's torn, Either with old, or plant therein new thorn; Tread o'er his glebe, but with such care, that where He sets his foot, he leaves rich compost there. I sing thy praise, Iacchus, Who with thy thyrse dost thwack us: And yet thou so dost back us With boldness, that we fear No Brutus ent'ring here, Nor Cato the severe. What though the lictors threat us, We know they dare not beat us, So long as thou dost heat us. When we thy orgies sing, Each cobbler is a king, Nor dreads he any thing: And though he do not rave, Yet he'll the courage have To call my Lord Mayor knave; Besides, too, in a brave, Although he has no riches, But walks with dangling breeches And skirts that want their stitches, And shows his naked flitches, Yet he'll be thought or seen So good as George-a-Green; And calls his blouze, his queen; And speaks in language keen. From cares and troubles free; And thou shalt hear how we Will chant new hymns to thee. Puss and her 'prentice both at drawgloves play; That done, they kiss, and so draw out the day: At night they draw to supper; then well fed, They draw their clothes off both, so draw to bed. Among disasters that dissension brings, This not the least is, which belongs to kings: If wars go well, each for a part lays claim; If ill, then kings, not soldiers, bear the blame. Kings must not only cherish up the good, Wrongs, if neglected, vanish in short time, But heard with anger, we confess the crime. That do in public places Drive thence whate'er encumbers The list'ning to my numbers. Who do with sweet embraces, Show they are well contented With what I have invented. Who do from sour faces, And lungs that would infect me, For evermore protect me. Near to the well of wit, And drink your fill of it. Glory and worship be To you, sweet maids, thrice three, Who still inspire me, And teach me how to sing Unto the lyric string My measures ravishing. Then while I sing your praise, My priesthood crown with bays Green, to the end of days. Whenas in silks my Julia goes, Then, then, methinks, how sweetly flows The liquefaction of her clothes. Next, when I cast mine eyes and see That brave vibration each way free; O how that glittering taketh me! In things a moderation keep: Kings ought to shear, not skin their sheep . Let's call for Hymen, if agreed thou art; Delays in love but crucify the heart . Love's thorny tapers yet neglected lie: Speak thou the word, they'll kindle by-and-bye. The nimble hours woo us on to wed, And Genius waits to have us both to bed. Behold, for us the naked Graces stay With maunds of roses for to strew the way: Besides, the most religious prophet stands Ready to join, as well our hearts as hands. Juno yet smiles; but if she chance to chide, Ill luck 'twill bode to th' bridegroom and the bride. Tell me, Anthea, dost thou fondly dread The loss of that we call a maidenhead? Come, I'll instruct thee. Know, the vestal fire Is not by marriage quench'd, but flames the higher. In this little urn is laid Prudence Baldwin, once my maid: From whose happy spark here let Spring the purple violet. To sup with thee thou did'st me home invite; And mad'st a promise that mine appetite Should meet and tire on such lautitious meat, The like not Heliogabalus did eat: And richer wine would'st give to me, thy guest, Than Roman Sylla pour'd out at his feast. I came, 'tis true, and looked for fowl of price, And for no less than aromatic wine Of maiden's-blush, commix'd with jessamine. Clean was the hearth, the mantel larded jet; Which wanting Lar, and smoke, hung weeping wet; At last, i' th' noon of winter, did appear A ragg'd-soust-neat's-foot with sick vinegar: And in a burnished flagonet stood by, Beer small as comfort, dead as charity. At which amaz'd, and pondering on the food, How cold it was, and how it chill'd my blood; I curs'd the master, and I damn'd the souce, And swore I'd got the ague of the house. Well, when to eat thou dost me next desire, I'll bring a fever, since thou keep'st no fire. Come, bring with a noise, My merry, merry boys, The Christmas log to the firing; While my good dame, she Bids ye all be free, And drink to your hearts' desiring. With the last year's brand Light the new block, and For good success in his spending On your psaltries play, That sweet luck may Come while the log is a-teending. Drink now the strong beer, Cut the white loaf here; The while the meat is a-shredding For the rare mince-pie, And the plums stand by To fill the paste that's a-kneading. Come guard this night the Christmas-pie, That the thief, though ne'er so sly, With his flesh-hooks, don't come nigh To catch it From him, who all alone sits there, Having his eyes still in his ear, And a deal of nightly fear, To watch it. Wash your hands, or else the fire Will not teend to your desire; Unwash'd hands, ye maidens, know, Dead the fire, though ye blow. Wassail the trees, that they may bear You many a plum and many a pear: For more or less fruits they will bring, As you do give them wassailing. 'Tis never, or but seldom known, Power and peace to keep one throne. Now is your turn, my dearest, to be set A gem in this eternal coronet: 'Twas rich before, but since your name is down It sparkles now like Ariadne's crown. Blaze by this sphere for ever: or this do, Let me and it shine evermore by you. Love thou dost, though love says nay. Speak me fair; for lovers be Gently kill'd by flattery. Who will not honour noble numbers, when Verses out-live the bravest deeds of men? That happiness does still the longest thrive, Where joys and griefs have turns alternative. We pray 'gainst war, yet we enjoy no peace; Desire deferr'd is that it may increase . Here I myself might likewise die, And utterly forgotten lie, But that eternal poetry Repullulation gives me here Unto the thirtieth thousand year, When all now dead shall reappear. Give me the food that satisfies a guest: Kisses are but dry banquets to a feast. Orpheus he went, as poets tell, To fetch Eurydice from hell; And had her; but it was upon This short but strict condition: Backward he should not look while he Led her through hell's obscurity: But ah! it happened, as he made His passage through that dreadful shade, Revolve he did his loving eye, For gentle fear or jealousy; And looking back, that look did sever Him and Eurydice for ever. Sappho, I will choose to go Where the northern winds do blow Endless ice and endless snow: Rather than I once would see But a winter's face in thee, To benumb my hopes and me. For all thy many courtesies to me, Nothing I have, my Crofts, to send to thee For the requital, save this only one Half of my just remuneration. For since I've travell'd all this realm throughout To seek and find some few immortals out To circumspangle this my spacious sphere, As lamps for everlasting shining here; And having fix'd thee in mine orb a star, Amongst the rest, both bright and singular, The present age will tell the world thou art, If not to th' whole, yet satisfi'd in part. As for the rest, being too great a sum Here to be paid, I'll pay't i' th' world to come. This day, my Julia, thou must make For Mistress Bride the wedding-cake: Knead but the dough, and it will be To paste of almonds turn'd by thee: Or kiss it thou but once or twice, And for the bride-cake there'll be spice. Let's now take our time While w'are in our prime, And old, old age is afar off: For the evil, evil days Will come on apace, Before we can be aware of. Man may want land to live in; but for all Nature finds out some place for burial. 'Tis the Chirurgeon's praise, and height of art, Not to cut off, but cure the vicious part. Who after his transgression doth repent, Is half, or altogether innocent. Consider sorrows, how they are aright: Grief, if't be great, 'tis short; if long, 'tis light . So look the mornings when the sun Paints them with fresh vermilion: So cherries blush, and Kathern pears, And apricots in youthful years: So corals look more lovely red, And rubies lately polished: So purest diaper doth shine, Stain'd by the beams of claret wine: As Julia looks when she doth dress Her either cheek with bashfulness. Is both unlucky, aye, and foolish, too. Where war with rashness is attempted, there The soldiers leave the field with equal fear. Readers, we entreat ye pray For the soul of Lucia; That in little time she be From her purgatory free: In the interim she desires That your tears may cool her fires. Seest thou that cloud that rides in state, Part ruby-like, part candidate? It is no other than the bed Where Venus sleeps half-smothered. I saw a fly within a bead Of amber cleanly buried; The urn was little, but the room More rich than Cleopatra's tomb. Whene'er I go, or whatsoe'er befalls Me in mine age, or foreign funerals, This blessing I will leave thee, ere I go: Prosper thy basket and therein thy dough. Feed on the paste of filberts, or else knead And bake the flour of amber for thy bread. Balm may thy trees drop, and thy springs run oil, And everlasting harvest crown thy soil! These I but wish for; but thyself shall see The blessing fall in mellow times on thee. Immortal clothing I put on So soon as, Julia, I am gone To mine eternal mansion. Thou, thou art here, to human sight Cloth'd all with incorrupted light; But yet how more admir'dly bright Wilt thou appear, when thou art set In thy refulgent thronelet, That shin'st thus in thy counterfeit! Does fortune rend thee? Bear with thy hard fate: Virtuous instructions ne'er are delicate . Say, does she frown? still countermand her threats: Virtue best loves those children that she beats . If I lie unburied, sir, These my relics pray inter: 'Tis religion's part to see Stones or turfs to cover me. One word more I had to say: But it skills not; go your way; He that wants a burial room For a stone, has Heaven his tomb . This day is yours, great Charles! and in this war Your fate, and ours, alike victorious are. In her white stole now Victory does rest Ensphered with palm on your triumphant crest . Fortune is now your captive; other Kings Hold but her hands; you hold both hands and wings . By the next kindling of the day, My Julia, thou shalt see, Ere Ave-Mary thou canst say I'll come and visit thee. Yet ere thou counsel'st with thy glass, Appear thou to mine eyes As smooth, and nak'd, as she that was The prime of paradise. If blush thou must, then blush thou through A lawn, that thou mayst look As purest pearls, or pebbles do When peeping through a brook. As lilies shrin'd in crystal, so Do thou to me appear; Or damask roses when they grow To sweet acquaintance there. 'Twas Csar's saying: Kings no less conquerors are By their wise counsel, than they be by war. Like those infernal deities which eat The best of all the sacrificed meat; And leave their servants but the smoke and sweat: So many kings, and primates too there are, Who claim the fat and fleshy for their share And leave their subjects but the starved ware. In desp'rate cases all, or most, are known Commanders, few for execution. I could but see thee yesterday Stung by a fretful bee; And I the javelin suck'd away, And heal'd the wound in thee. A thousand thorns and briars and stings, I have in my poor breast; Yet ne'er can see that salve which brings My passions any rest. As love shall help me, I admire How thou canst sit, and smile To see me bleed, and not desire To staunch the blood the while. If thou, compos'd of gentle mould, Art so unkind to me; What dismal stories will be told Of those that cruel be? All has been plundered from me but my wit: Fortune herself can lay no claim to it. Milk still your fountains and your springs: for why? The more th'are drawn, the less they will grow dry. Thou say'st Love's dart Hath pricked thy heart; And thou dost languish too: If one poor prick Can make thee sick, Say, what would many do? Shall I go to Love and tell, Thou art all turned icicle? Shall I say her altars be Disadorn'd and scorn'd by thee? O beware! in time submit; Love has yet no wrathful fit: If her patience turns to ire, Love is then consuming fire. Ay me! I love; give him your hand to kiss Who both your wooer and your poet is. Nature has precompos'd us both to love: Your part's to grant; my scene must be to move. Dear, can you like, and liking love your poet? If you say Aye, blush-guiltiness will show it. Mine eyes must woo you, though I sigh the while: True love is tongueless as a crocodile . And you may find in love these different parts Wooers have tongues of ice, but burning hearts . Here she lies, in bed of spice, For her beauty it was such Poets could not praise too much. Virgins, come, and in a ring Her supremest requiem sing; Then depart, but see ye tread Lightly, lightly, o'er the dead. Love is a circle, and an endless sphere; From good to good, revolving here and there. Beauty's no other but a lovely grace Of lively colours flowing from the face. Some salve to every sore we may apply; Only for my wound there's no remedy. Yet if my Julia kiss me, there will be A sovereign balm found out to cure me. Make haste away, and let one be A friendly patron unto thee: Lest, rapt from hence, I see thee lie Torn for the use of pastery: Or see thy injur'd leaves serve well, To make loose gowns for mackerel: Or see the grocers in a trice, Make hoods of thee to serve out spice. The readiness of doing doth express No other but the doer's willingness. When words we want, Love teacheth to indite; And what we blush to speak, she bids us write. Two things do make society to stand: The first commerce is, and the next command. Gone she is a long, long way, But she has decreed a day Back to come, and make no stay: So we keep, till her return, Here, her ashes, or her urn. For all our works a recompense is sure: 'Tis sweet to think on what was hard t' endure . Why so slowly do you move To the centre of your love? On your niceness though we wait, Yet the hours say 'tis late: Coyness takes us, to a measure; But o'eracted deads the pleasure. Go to bed, and care not when Cheerful day shall spring again. One brave captain did command, By his word, the sun to stand: One short charm, if you but say, Will enforce the moon to stay, Till you warn her hence, away, T' have your blushes seen by day. Touch but thy lyre, my Harry, and I hear From thee some raptures of the rare Gotiere; Then if thy voice commingle with the string, I hear in thee rare Laniere to sing; Or curious Wilson: tell me, canst thou be Less than Apollo, that usurp'st such three? Three, unto whom the whole world give applause; Yet their three praises praise but one; that's Lawes. appointed Master of the King's Music in . Maidens tell me I am old; Let me in my glass behold Whether smooth or not I be, Or if hair remains to me. Well, or be't or be't not so, This for certainty I know, Ill it fits old men to play, When that Death bids come away. Thou hast made many houses for the dead; When my lot calls me to be buried, For love or pity, prithee let there be I' th' churchyard made one tenement for me. Anthea, I am going hence With some small stock of innocence: But yet those blessed gates I see Withstanding entrance unto me. To pray for me do thou begin, The porter then will let me in. Who begs to die for fear of human need, Wisheth his body, not his soul, good speed. I am zealless; prithee pray For my welfare, Julia, For I think the gods require Male perfumes, but female fire. Male perfumes , perfumes of the best kind. Sweet are my Julia's lips and clean, As if o'erwashed in Hippocrene. Twilight no other thing is, poets say, Than the last part of night and first of day. Love, love me now, because I place Thee here among my righteous race: Wanting both root and earth; but thy Immortal self shall boldly trust To live for ever with my Just. If that my fate has now fulfill'd my year, And so soon stopt my longer living here; What was't, ye gods, a dying man to save, But while he met with his paternal grave! Though while we living 'bout the world do roam, We love to rest in peaceful urns at home, Where we may snug, and close together lie By the dead bones of our dear ancestry. 'Twixt kings and tyrants there's this difference known: Kings seek their subjects' good, tyrants their own . Our crosses are no other than the rods, And our diseases, vultures of the gods: Each grief we feel, that likewise is a kite Sent forth by them, our flesh to eat, or bite. Love brought me to a silent grove And show'd me there a tree, Where some had hang'd themselves for love, And gave a twist to me. The halter was of silk and gold, That he reach'd forth unto me; No otherwise than if he would By dainty things undo me. He bade me then that necklace use; And told me, too, he maketh A glorious end by such a noose, His death for love that taketh. 'Twas but a dream; but had I been There really alone, My desp'rate fears in love had seen Mine execution. Night makes no difference 'twixt the priest and clerk; Joan as my lady is as good i' th' dark. The body is the soul's poor house or home, Whose ribs the laths are, and whose flesh the loam. Thou say'st thou lov'st me, Sappho; I say no; But would to Love I could believe 'twas so! Pardon my fears, sweet Sappho; I desire That thou be righteous found, and I the liar. We blame, nay, we despise her pains That wets her garden when it rains: But when the drought has dried the knot, Then let her use the wat'ring-pot. We pray for showers, at our need, To drench, but not to drown our seed. Knot , quaintly shaped flower-bed. Take mine advice, and go not near Those faces, sour as vinegar. For these, and nobler numbers can Ne'er please the supercilious man. Stand by the magic of my powerful rhymes 'Gainst all the indignation of the times. Age shall not wrong thee; or one jot abate Of thy both great and everlasting fate. While others perish, here's thy life decreed, Because begot of my immortal seed. . Come and let's in solemn wise Both address to sacrifice: Old religion first commands That we wash our hearts, and hands. Is the beast exempt from stain, Altar clean, no fire profane? Are the garlands, is the nard With the wine that must be shed, 'Twixt the horns, upon the head Of the holy beast we bring For our trespass-offering. All is well; now next to these Put we on pure surplices; And with chaplets crown'd, we'll roast With perfumes the holocaust: And, while we the gods invoke, Read acceptance by the smoke. Thou mighty lord and master of the lyre, Unshorn Apollo, come and re-inspire My fingers so, the lyric-strings to move, That I may play and sing a hymn to Love. Love is a kind of war: hence those who fear! No cowards must his royal ensigns bear. Where love begins, there dead thy first desire: A spark neglected makes a mighty fire . Thou, thou that bear'st the sway, With whom the sea-nymphs play; And Venus, every way: When I embrace thy knee, And make short pray'rs to thee, In love then prosper me. This day I go to woo; This work thou put'st me to. From shame my face keep free; From scorn I beg of thee, Love, to deliver me: So shall I sing thy praise, And to thee altars raise, Unto the end of days. Let not thy tombstone e'er be laid by me: Nor let my hearse be wept upon by thee: But let that instant when thou diest be known The minute of mine expiration. One knell be rung for both; and let one grave To hold us two an endless honour have. My soul would one day go and seek For roses, and in Julia's cheek A richesse of those sweets she found, As in another Rosamond. But gathering roses as she was, Not knowing what would come to pass, It chanc'd a ringlet of her hair Caught my poor soul, as in a snare: Which ever since has been in thrall; Yet freedom she enjoys withal. The factions of the great ones call, To side with them, the commons all. Tell me, what needs those rich deceits, These golden toils, and trammel nets, To take thine hairs when they are known Already tame, and all thine own? 'Tis I am wild, and more than hairs Deserve these meshes and those snares. Set free thy tresses, let them flow As airs do breathe or winds do blow: And let such curious net-works be Less set for them than spread for me. Love in a shower of blossoms came Down, and half drown'd me with the same: The blooms that fell were white and red; But with such sweets commingld, As whether this I cannot tell My sight was pleas'd more, or my smell: But true it was, as I roll'd there, Without a thought of hurt or fear, Love turn'd himself into a bee, And with his javelin wounded me: From which mishap this use I make, Where most sweets are, there lies a snake: Kisses and favours are sweet things; But those have thorns and these have stings. Naught are all women: I say no, Since for one bad, one good I know: For Clytemnestra most unkind, Loving Alcestis there we find: For one Medea that was bad, A good Penelope was had: For wanton Lais, then we have Chaste Lucrece, a wife as grave: And thus through womankind we see A good and bad. Sirs, credit me. 'Tis liberty to serve one lord; but he Who many serves, serves base servility. Bring the holy crust of bread, Lay it underneath the head; 'Tis a certain charm to keep Hags away, while children sleep. Let the superstitious wife Near the child's heart lay a knife: Point be up, and haft be down While she gossips in the town ; This, 'mongst other mystic charms, Keeps the sleeping child from harms. To house the hag, you must do this: Commix with meal a little piss Of him bewitch'd; then forthwith make A little wafer or a cake; And this rawly bak'd will bring The old hag in. No surer thing. Hang up hooks and shears to scare Hence the hag that rides the mare, Till they be all over wet With the mire and the sweat: This observ'd, the manes shall be Of your horses all knot-free. Down with the rosemary and bays, Down with the mistletoe; Instead of holly, now up-raise The greener box, for show. The holly hitherto did sway; Let box now domineer Until the dancing Easter day, Or Easter's eve appear. Then youthful box which now hath grace Your houses to renew; Grown old, surrender must his place Unto the crisped yew. When yew is out, then birch comes in, And many flowers beside; Both of a fresh and fragrant kin To honour Whitsuntide. Green rushes, then, and sweetest bents, With cooler oaken boughs, Come in for comely ornaments To re-adorn the house. Thus times do shift; each thing his turn does hold: Kindle the Christmas brand, and then Till sunset let it burn; Which quench'd, then lay it up again Till Christmas next return. Part must be kept wherewith to teend The Christmas log next year, And where 'tis safely kept, the fiend Can do no mischief there. End now the white loaf and the pie, And let all sports with Christmas die. Would I woo, and would I win? Would I well my work begin? Would I evermore be crowned With the end that I propound? Would I frustrate or prevent All aspects malevolent? Thwart all wizards, and with these Dead all black contingencies: Place my words and all works else In most happy parallels? All will prosper, if so be I be kiss'd or bless'd by thee. Put on thy holy filletings, and so To th' temple with the sober midwife go. Attended thus, in a most solemn wise, By those who serve the child-bed mysteries, Burn first thine incense; next, whenas thou see'st The candid stole thrown o'er the pious priest, With reverend curtsies come, and to him bring Thy free and not decurted offering. All rites well ended, with fair auspice come As to the breaking of a bride-cake home, Where ceremonious Hymen shall for thee Provide a second epithalamy. She who keeps chastely to her husband's side Is not for one, but every night his bride; And stealing still with love and fear to bed, Brings him not one, but many a maidenhead. Before the press scarce one could see A little-peeping-part of thee; But since thou'rt printed, thou dost call To show thy nakedness to all. My care for thee is now the less, Having resign'd thy shamefac'dness. Go with thy faults and fates; yet stay And take this sentence, then away: Whom one belov'd will not suffice, She'll run to all adulteries. Tears most prevail; with tears, too, thou may'st move Rocks to relent, and coyest maids to love. Words beget anger; anger brings forth blows; Blows make of dearest friends immortal foes. For which prevention, sociate, let there be Betwixt us two no more logomachy. Far better 'twere for either to be mute, Than for to murder friendship by dispute. Truth is best found out by the time and eyes; Falsehood wins credit by uncertainties . We credit most our sight; one eye doth please Our trust far more than ten ear-witnesses. Want is a softer wax, that takes thereon This, that, and every base impression. Look in my book, and herein see Life endless signed to thee and me. We o'er the tombs and fates shall fly; While other generations die. Should I not put on blacks, when each one here Comes with his cypress and devotes a tear? Should I not grieve, my Lawes, when every lute, Viol, and voice is by thy loss struck mute? Thy loss, brave man! whose numbers have been hurl'd, And no less prais'd than spread throughout the world. Some have thee call'd Amphion; some of us Nam'd thee Terpander, or sweet Orpheus: Some this, some that, but all in this agree, Music had both her birth and death with thee. From me my Silvia ran away, And running therewithal A primrose bank did cross her way, And gave my love a fall. But trust me now, I dare not say What I by chance did see; But such the drap'ry did betray That fully ravished me. If thou hast found an honeycomb, Eat thou not all, but taste on some: For if thou eat'st it to excess, That sweetness turns to loathsomeness. Taste it to temper, then 'twill be Marrow and manna unto thee. Here lies Jonson with the rest Of the poets: but the best. Reader, would'st thou more have known? Ask his story, not this stone. That will speak what this can't tell Of his glory. So farewell. Say how, or when Shall we thy guests Meet at those lyric feasts Where we such clusters had, As made us nobly wild, not mad; And yet each verse of thine Out-did the meat, out-did the frolic wine. Or come again, Or send to us Thy wit's great overplus; But teach us yet Wisely to husband it, Lest we that talent spend: And having once brought to an end That precious stock; the store Of such a wit the world should have no more. Spend, harmless shade, thy nightly hours Selecting here both herbs and flowers; Of which make garlands here and there To dress thy silent sepulchre. Nor do thou fear the want of these In everlasting properties , Since we fresh strewings will bring hither, Far faster than the first can wither. In battles what disasters fall, The king he bears the blame of all. Ponder my words, if so that any be Known guilty here of incivility: Let what is graceless, discompos'd, and rude, With sweetness, smoothness, softness, be endu'd. Teach it to blush, to curtsy, lisp, and show Demure, but yet full of temptation, too. Numbers ne'er tickle, or but lightly please, Unless they have some wanton carriages. This if ye do, each piece will here be good, And graceful made by your neat sisterhood. I lately fri'd, but now behold I freeze as fast, and shake for cold. And in good faith I'd thought it strange T' have found in me this sudden change; But that I understood by dreams These only were but Love's extremes; Who fires with hope the lover's heart, And starves with cold the self-same part. We trust not to the multitude in war, But to the stout, and those that skilful are. Man must do well out of a good intent; Not for the servile fear of punishment. What! can my Kellam drink his sack In goblets to the brim, And see his Robin Herrick lack, Yet send no bowls to him? For love or pity to his muse, That she may flow in verse, Contemn to recommend a cruse, But send to her a tierce. First, may the hand of bounty bring Into the daily offering Of full provision such a store, Till that the cook cries: Bring no more. Upon your hogsheads never fall A drought of wine, ale, beer, at all; But, like full clouds, may they from thence Diffuse their mighty influence. Next, let the lord and lady here Enjoy a Christ'ning year by year; And this good blessing back them still, T' have boys, and girls too, as they will. Then from the porch may many a bride Unto the holy temple ride: And thence return, short prayers said, A wife most richly married. Last, may the bride and bridegroom be Untouch'd by cold sterility; But in their springing blood so play, As that in lusters few they may, By laughing too, and lying down, People a city or a town. The lictors bundled up their rods; beside, Knit them with knots with much ado unti'd, That if, unknitting, men would yet repent, They might escape the lash of punishment. Men are suspicious, prone to discontent: Subjects still loathe the present government. Lay by the good a while; a resting field Will, after ease, a richer harvest yield; Trees this year bear: next, they their wealth withhold: Continual reaping makes a land wax old . Man's disposition is for to requite An injury, before a benefit: Thanksgiving is a burden and a pain; Revenge is pleasing to us, as our gain. In all our high designments 'twill appear, The first event breeds confidence or fear . Hard are the two first stairs unto a crown: Which got, the third bids him a king come down. Faith is a thing that's four-square; let it fall This way or that, it not declines at all. Praise they that will times past; I joy to see Myself now live: this age best pleaseth me . Though from without no foes at all we fear, We shall be wounded by the clothes we wear. 'Tis but a dog-like madness in bad kings, For to delight in wounds and murderings: As some plants prosper best by cuts and blows, So kings by killing do increase their foes. Tears quickly dry, griefs will in time decay: A clear will come after a cloudy day. Ask me what hunger is, and I'll reply, 'Tis but a fierce desire of hot and dry. In this misfortune kings do most excel, To hear the worst from men when they do well. Conquer we shall, but we must first contend; 'Tis not the fight that crowns us, but the end . Bind me but to thee with thine hair, And quickly I shall be Made by that fetter or that snare A bondman unto thee. Or if thou tak'st that bond away, Then bore me through the ear, And by the law I ought to stay For ever with thee here. Give house-room to the best; 'tis never known Virtue and pleasure both to dwell in one . Pardon my trespass, Silvia; I confess My kiss out-went the bounds of shamefastness: None is discreet at all times; no, not Jove Himself, at one time, can be wise and love . Smooth was the sea, and seem'd to call Two pretty girls to play withal: Who paddling there, the sea soon frown'd, And on a sudden both were drown'd. What credit can we give to seas, Who, kissing, kill such saints as these? Fat be my hind; unlearned be my wife; Peaceful my night; my day devoid of strife: To these a comely offspring I desire, Singing about my everlasting fire. How fierce was I, when I did see My Julia wash herself in thee! So lilies thorough crystal look: So purest pebbles in the brook: As in the river Julia did, Half with a lawn of water hid. Into thy streams myself I threw, And struggling there, I kiss'd thee too; And more had done, it is confess'd, Had not thy waves forbade the rest. Though frankincense the deities require, We must not give all to the hallowed fire . Such be our gifts, and such be our expense, As for ourselves to leave some frankincense. A roll of parchment Clunn about him bears, Charg'd with the arms of all his ancestors: And seems half ravish'd, when he looks upon That bar, this bend; that fess, this cheveron; This manch, that moon; this martlet, and that mound; This counterchange of pearl and diamond. What joy can Clunn have in that coat, or this, Whenas his own still out at elbows is? Love, like a beggar, came to me With hose and doublet torn: His shirt bedangling from his knee, With hat and shoes outworn. He ask'd an alms; I gave him bread, And meat too, for his need: Of which, when he had fully fed, He wished me all good speed. Away he went, but as he turn'd In faith I know not how He touch'd me so, as that I burn , And am tormented now. Love's silent flames and fires obscure Then crept into my heart; And though I saw no bow, I'm sure His finger was the dart. I will confess With cheerfulness, Love is a thing so likes me, On me all day, I'll kiss the hand that strikes me. I will not, I, Now blubb'ring, cry, It, ah! too late repents me, That I did fall To love at all, Since love so much contents me. No, no, I'll be In fetters free: While others they sit wringing Their hands for pain, I'll entertain The wounds of love with singing. With flowers and wine, And cakes divine, To strike me I will tempt thee: Which done; no more I'll come before Thee and thine altars empty. For brave comportment, wit without offence, Words fully flowing, yet of influence: Thou art that man of men, the man alone, Worthy the public admiration: Who with thine own eyes read'st what we do write, And giv'st our numbers euphony and weight; Tell'st when a verse springs high, how understood To be, or not, born of the royal blood. What state above, what symmetry below, Lines have, or should have, thou the best can'st show. For which, my Charles, it is my pride to be Not so much known, as to be lov'd of thee. Long may I live so, and my wreath of bays Be less another's laurel than thy praise. What need we marry women, when Without their use we may have men, And such as will in short time be For murder fit, or mutiny? As Cadmus once a new way found, By throwing teeth into the ground; From which poor seed, and rudely sown, Sprung up a war-like nation: So let us iron, silver, gold, Brass, lead, or tin throw into th' mould; And we shall see in little space Rise up of men a fighting race. If this can be, say then, what need Have we of women or their seed? Love is a syrup; and whoe'er we see Sick and surcharg'd with this satiety, Shall by this pleasing trespass quickly prove There's loathsomeness e'en in the sweets of love . Love is a leaven; and a loving kiss The leaven of a loving sweetheart is. Physicians say repletion springs More from the sweet than sour things. Weep for the dead, for they have lost this light: And weep for me, lost in an endless night. Or mourn, or make a marble verse for me, Who writ for many. Benedicite. No man such rare parts hath that he can swim, If favour or occasion help not him. Lost to the world; lost to myself; alone Here now I rest under this marble stone: In depth of silence, heard and seen of none. I will be short, and having quickly hurl'd This line about, live thou throughout the world; Who art a man for all scenes; unto whom, What's hard to others, nothing's troublesome. Can'st write the comic, tragic strain, and fall From these to pen the pleasing pastoral: Who fli'st at all heights: prose and verse run'st through; Find'st here a fault, and mend'st the trespass too: For which I might extol thee, but speak less, Because thyself art coming to the press: And then should I in praising thee be slow, Posterity will pay thee what I owe. Tell me, young man, or did the Muses bring Thee less to taste than to drink up their spring, That none hereafter should be thought, or be A poet, or a poet-like but thee? What was thy birth, thy star that makes thee known, At twice ten years, a prime and public one? Tell us thy nation, kindred, or the whence Thou had'st and hast thy mighty influence, That makes thee lov'd, and of the men desir'd, And no less prais'd than of the maids admired. Put on thy laurel then; and in that trim Be thou Apollo or the type of him: Or let the unshorn god lend thee his lyre, And next to him be master of the choir. Offer thy gift; but first the law commands Thee, Julia, first, to sanctify thy hands: Do that, my Julia, which the rites require, Then boldly give thine incense to the fire. Handsome you are, and proper you will be Despite of all your infortunity: Live long and lovely, but yet grow no less In that your own prefixed comeliness: Spend on that stock: and when your life must fall, Leave others beauty to set up withal. If hap it must, that I must see thee lie Absyrtus-like, all torn confusedly: With solemn tears, and with much grief of heart, I'll recollect thee, weeping, part by part; And having wash'd thee, close thee in a chest With spice; that done, I'll leave thee to thy rest. Welcome, great Csar, welcome now you are As dearest peace after destructive war: Welcome as slumbers, or as beds of ease After our long and peevish sicknesses. O pomp of glory! Welcome now, and come To repossess once more your long'd-for home. A thousand altars smoke: a thousand thighs Of beeves here ready stand for sacrifice. Enter and prosper; while our eyes do wait For an ascendent throughly auspicate: Under which sign we may the former stone Lay of our safety's new foundation: That done, O Csar! live and be to us Our fate, our fortune, and our genius; To whose free knees we may our temples tie As to a still protecting deity: That should you stir, we and our altars too May, great Augustus, go along with you. Long live the King! and to accomplish this, We'll from our own add far more years to his. And as time past when Cato the severe Enter'd the circumspacious theatre, In reverence of his person everyone Stood as he had been turn'd from flesh to stone; E'en so my numbers will astonished be If but looked on; struck dead, if scann'd by thee. Tell that brave man, fain thou would'st have access To kiss his hands, but that for fearfulness; Or else because th'art like a modest bride, Ready to blush to death, should he but chide. When first I find those numbers thou dost write, To be most soft, terse, sweet, and perpolite: Next, when I see thee tow'ring in the sky, In an expansion no less large than high; Then, in that compass, sailing here and there, And with circumgyration everywhere; Following with love and active heat thy game, And then at last to truss the epigram; I must confess, distinction none I see Between Domitian's Martial then, and thee. But this I know, should Jupiter again Descend from heaven to reconverse with men; The Roman language full, and superfine, If Jove would speak, he would accept of thine. Now thou art dead, no eye shall ever see, For shape and service, spaniel like to thee. This shall my love do, give thy sad death one Tear, that deserves of me a million. Drowning, drowning, I espy Coming from my Julia's eye: 'Tis some solace in our smart, To have friends to bear a part: I have none; but must be sure Th' inundation to endure. Shall not times hereafter tell This for no mean miracle? When the waters by their fall Threaten'd ruin unto all, Yet the deluge here was known Of a world to drown but one. Let kings and rulers learn this line from me: Where power is weak, unsafe is majesty . Thou see'st me, Lucia, this year droop; Three zodiacs filled more, I shall stoop; Let crutches then provided be To shore up my debility. Then, while thou laugh'st, I'll sighing cry, A ruin, underpropp'd, am I. Don will I then my beadsman's gown, And when so feeble I am grown, As my weak shoulders cannot bear The burden of a grasshopper, Yet with the bench of aged sires, When I and they keep termly fires, With my weak voice I'll sing, or say, Some odes I made of Lucia: Then will I heave my wither'd hand To Jove the mighty, for to stand Thy faithful friend, and to pour down Upon thee many a benison. Holy waters hither bring For the sacred sprinkling: Baptise me and thee, and so Let us to the altar go, And, ere we our rites commence, Wash our hands in innocence. Then I'll be the Rex Sacrorum, Case is a lawyer, that ne'er pleads alone, But when he hears the like confusion, As when the disagreeing Commons throw About their House, their clamorous Aye or No: Then Case, as loud as any serjeant there, Cries out: My lord, my lord, the case is clear. But when all's hush'd, Case, than a fish more mute, Bestirs his hand, but starves in hand the suit. I a dirge will pen to thee; Thou a trentall make for me: That the monks and friars together, Here may sing the rest of either: Next, I'm sure, the nuns will have Candlemas to grace the grave. The person crowns the place; your lot doth fall Last, yet to be with these a principal. Howe'er it fortuned; know for truth, I meant You a fore-leader in this testament. This stone can tell the story of my life, What was my birth, to whom I was a wife: In teeming years, how soon my sun was set. Where now I rest, these may be known by jet. For other things, my many children be The best and truest chronicles of me. Grow up in beauty, as thou dost begin, And be of all admired, Tomasin. Down with the rosemary, and so Down with the bays and mistletoe; Down with the holly, ivy, all, Wherewith ye dressed the Christmas Hall: That so the superstitious find No one least branch there left behind: For look, how many leaves there be Neglected, there maids, trust to me So many goblins you shall see. He that will live of all cares dispossess'd, Must shun the bad, aye, and suspect the best. Welcome to this my college, and though late Thou'st got a place here standing candidate It matters not, since thou art chosen one Here of my great and good foundation. For a kiss or two, confess, What doth cause this pensiveness, Thou most lovely neat-herdess? Why so lonely on the hill? Why thy pipe by thee so still, That erewhile was heard so shrill? Tell me, do thy kine now fail To full fill the milking-pail? Say, what is't that thou dost ail? None of these; but out, alas! A mischance is come to pass, And I'll tell thee what it was: See, mine eyes are weeping-ripe. Tell, and I'll lay down my pipe. I have lost my lovely steer, That to me was far more dear Than these kine which I milk here: Broad of forehead, large of eye, Party-colour'd like a pie; Smooth in each limb as a die; Clear of hoof, and clear of horn: Sharply pointed as a thorn, With a neck by yoke unworn; From the which hung down by strings, Balls of cowslips, daisy rings, Interplac'd with ribbonings: Faultless every way for shape; Not a straw could him escape; Ever gamesome as an ape, But yet harmless as a sheep. Pardon, Lacon, if I weep; Tears will spring where woes are deep . Now, ay me! ay me! Last night Came a mad dog and did bite, Aye, and kill'd my dear delight. Alack, for grief! But I'll be brief. Hence I must, for time doth call Me, and my sad playmates all, To his ev'ning funeral. Live long, Lacon, so adieu! Mournful maid, farewell to you; Earth afford ye flowers to strew . Look upon Sappho's lip, and you will swear There is a love-like leaven rising there. Your cup, But not spill wine; For if you 'Tis an ill sign; You are cloy'd here, If so, no But avoid here. Care keeps the conquest; 'tis no less renown To keep a city than to win a town. Men must have bounds how far to walk; for we Are made far worse by lawless liberty. It is noon and past with me: In a while it will strike one; Then, Bianca, I am gone. Some effusions let me have Offer'd on my holy grave; Then, Bianca, let me rest With my face towards the East. As is your name, so is your comely face Touch'd everywhere with such diffused grace, As that in all that admirable round There is not one least solecism found; And as that part, so every portion else Keeps line for line with beauty's parallels. I must Not trust Here to any; Bereav'd, Deceiv'd By so many: As one By my losses; With my crosses; Yet still I will Not be grieving, Since thence And hence Comes relieving. But this In our mourning; And sad Are a-turning: And he See dejected, We may See erected. 'Tis still observ'd those men most valiant are, That are most modest ere they come to war. Why should we covet much, whenas we know W'ave more to bear our charge than way to go? Brisk methinks I am, and fine When I drink my cap'ring wine: Then to love I do incline, When I drink my wanton wine: And I wish all maidens mine, When I drink my sprightly wine: Well I sup and well I dine, When I drink my frolic wine; But I languish, lower, and pine, When I want my fragrant wine. Kings must not use the axe for each offence: Princes cure some faults by their patience. Despair takes heart, when there's no hope to speed: The coward then takes arms and does the deed. Let's strive to be the best; the gods, we know it, Pillars and men, hate an indifferent poet. I bring ye love: What will love do? Like and dislike ye. I bring ye love: What will love do? Stroke ye to strike ye. I bring ye love: What will love do? Love will befool ye. I bring ye love: What will love do? Heat ye to cool ye. I bring ye love: What will love do? Love gifts will send ye. I bring ye love: What will love do? Stock ye to spend ye. I bring ye love: What will love do? Love will fulfil ye. I bring ye love: What will love do? Kiss ye to kill ye. Go on, brave Hopton, to effectuate that Which we, and times to come, shall wonder at. Lift up thy sword; next, suffer it to fall, And by that one blow set an end to all. How well contented in this private grange Spend I my life, that's subject unto change: Under whose roof with moss-work wrought, there I Kiss my brown wife and black posterity. When to a house I come, and see The Genius wasteful, more than free: The servants thumbless, yet to eat With lawless tooth the flour of wheat: The sons to suck the milk of kine, More than the teats of discipline: The daughters wild and loose in dress, Their cheeks unstained with shamefac'dness: The husband drunk, the wife to be A bawd to incivility; I must confess, I there descry, A house spread through with leprosy. This rule of manners I will teach my guests: To come with their own bellies unto feasts; Not to eat equal portions, but to rise Farced with the food that may themselves suffice. Anthea laugh'd, and fearing lest excess Might stretch the cords of civil comeliness, She with a dainty blush rebuk'd her face, And call'd each line back to his rule and space. Be not dismayed though crosses cast thee down; Thy fall is but the rising to a crown. Attempt the end, and never stand to doubt; Nothing's so hard but search will find it out. On with thy work, though thou be'st hardly press'd: Labour is held up by the hope of rest . When flowing garments I behold Inspir'd with purple, pearl and gold, I think no other, but I see In them a glorious leprosy That does infect and make the rent More mortal in the vestiment. As flowery vestures do descry The wearer's rich immodesty: So plain and simple clothes do show Where virtue walks, not those that flow. To an old sore a long cure must go on: Great faults require great satisfaction. You ask me what I do, and how I live? And, noble friend, this answer I must give: Drooping, I draw on to the vaults of death, O'er which you'll walk, when I am laid beneath. Shall I a daily beggar be, For love's sake asking alms of thee? Still shall I crave, and never get A hope of my desired bit? Ah, cruel maids! I'll go my way, Whereas, perchance, my fortunes may Find out a threshold or a door That may far sooner speed the poor: Where thrice we knock, and none will hear, Cold comfort still I'm sure lives there. Made by the coiners illegitimate. My many cares and much distress Has made me like a wilderness; Or, discompos'd, I'm like a rude And all confused multitude: Out of my comely manners worn, And, as in means, in mind all torn. Methought I saw, as I did dream in bed, A crawling vine about Anacreon's head. Flushed was his face; his hairs with oil did shine; And, as he spake, his mouth ran o'er with wine. Tippled he was, and tippling lisped withal; And lisping reeled, and reeling like to fall. A young enchantress close by him did stand, Tapping his plump thighs with a myrtle wand: She smil'd; he kiss'd; and kissing, cull'd her too, And being cup-shot, more he could not do. For which, methought, in pretty anger she Snatched off his crown, and gave the wreath to me; Since when, methinks, my brains about do swim, And I am wild and wanton like to him. Happily I had a sight Of my dearest dear last night; Make her this day smile on me, And I'll roses give to thee. The bound, almost, now of my book I see, But yet no end of these therein, or me: Here we begin new life, while thousands quite Are lost, and theirs, in everlasting night. Then did I live when I did see Perilla smile on none but me. But, ah! by stars malignant crossed, The life I got I quickly lost; But yet a way there doth remain For me embalm'd to live again, And that's to love me; in which state I'll live as one regenerate. Man may at first transgress, but next do well: Vice doth in some but lodge a while, not dwell . Let others to the printing press run fast; Since after death comes glory, I'll not haste. What's got by justice is established sure: No kingdoms got by rapine long endure . What needs complaints, When she a place Has with the race Of saints? In endless mirth, She thinks not on What's said or done In earth. She sees no tears, Or any tone Of thy deep groan She hears: Nor does she mind, Or think on't now, That ever thou Wast kind; But chang'd above, She likes not there. As she did here, Thy love. Forbear, therefore, And lull asleep Thy woes, and weep No more. Partly work and partly play Ye must on S. Distaff's day: From the plough soon free your team, Then come home and fodder them. If the maids a-spinning go, Burn the flax and fire the tow; Scorch their plackets, but beware That ye singe no maidenhair. Bring in pails of water, then, Let the maids bewash the men. Give S. Distaff all the right, Then bid Christmas sport good-night; And next morrow everyone To his own vocation. In the hope of ease to come, Let's endure one martyrdom. I send, I send here my supremest kiss To thee, my silver-footed Thamesis. No more shall I reiterate thy Strand, Whereon so many stately structures stand: Nor in the summer's sweeter evenings go To bathe in thee, as thousand others do; No more shall I along thy crystal glide In barge with boughs and rushes beautifi'd, With soft-smooth virgins for our chaste disport, Never again shall I with finny oar Put from, or draw unto the faithful shore: And landing here, or safely landing there, Make way to my beloved Westminster, Or to the golden Cheapside, where the earth Of Julia Herrick gave to me my birth. May all clean nymphs and curious water-dames With swan-like state float up and down thy streams: No drought upon thy wanton waters fall To make them lean and languishing at all. No ruffling winds come hither to disease Thy pure and silver-wristed Naiades. Keep up your state, ye streams; and as ye spring, Never make sick your banks by surfeiting. Grow young with tides, and though I see ye never, Receive this vow, so fare ye well for ever. Those ends in war the best contentment bring, Whose peace is made up with a pardoning . Great cities seldom rest; if there be none T' invade from far, they'll find worse foes at home. 'Twixt truth and error there's this difference known; Error is fruitful, truth is only one. Things are uncertain, and the more we get, The more on icy pavements we are set. Studies themselves will languish and decay, When either price or praise is ta'en away. Dread not the shackles: on with thine intent; Good wits get more fame by their punishment . Now, now the mirth comes With the cake full of plums, Where bean's the king of the sport here; Beside we must know, The pea also Must revel, as queen, in the court here. Begin then to choose, This night as ye use, Who shall for the present delight here, Be a king by the lot, And who shall not Be Twelfth-day queen for the night here. Which known, let us make Joy-sops with the cake; And let not a man then be seen here, Who unurg'd will not drink To the base from the brink A health to the king and the queen here. Next crown the bowl full With gentle lamb's wool: Add sugar, nutmeg, and ginger, With store of ale too; And thus ye must do To make the wassail a swinger. Give then to the king And queen wassailing: And though with ale ye be whet here, Yet part ye from hence, As free from offence As when ye innocent met here. Give me a man that is not dull When all the world with rifts is full; But unamaz'd dares clearly sing, Whenas the roof's a-tottering: And, though it falls, continues still Tickling the cittern with his quill. Know when to speak; for many times it brings Danger to give the best advice to kings. Let moderation on thy passions wait; Who loves too much, too much the lov'd will hate. Still take advice; though counsels, when they fly At random, sometimes hit most happily. Conformity gives comeliness to things: And equal shares exclude all murmurings. Who violates the customs, hurts the health, Not of one man, but all the commonwealth. 'Tis much among the filthy to be clean; Our heat of youth can hardly keep the mean . Like will to like, each creature loves his kind; Chaste words proceed still from a bashful mind. Among these tempests great and manifold My ship has here one only anchor-hold; That is my hope, which if that slip, I'm one Wildered in this vast wat'ry region. 'Tis no discomfort in the world to fall, When the great crack not crushes one, but all. The twilight is no other thing, we say, Than night now gone, and yet not sprung the day. He who wears blacks, and mourns not for the dead, Does but deride the party buried. No grief is grown so desperate, but the ill Is half way cured if the party will. If wholesome diet can recure a man, What need of physic or physician? Stripes, justly given, yerk us with their fall; But causeless whipping smarts the most of all. Along, come along, Let's meet in a throng Here of tinkers; And quaff up a bowl As big as a cowl To beer drinkers. The pole of the hop Place in the aleshop To bethwack us, If ever we think So much as to drink Who frolic will be For little cost, he Must not vary From beer-broth at all, So much as to call The only comfort of my life Is, that I never yet had wife; Nor will hereafter; since I know Who weds, o'er-buys his weal with woe Wash clean the vessel, lest ye sour Whatever liquor in ye pour. Sick is Anthea, sickly is the spring, The primrose sick, and sickly everything; The while my dear Anthea does but droop, The tulips, lilies, daffodils do stoop: But when again she's got her healthful hour, Each bending then will rise a proper flower. Now, if you love me, tell me, For as I will not sell ye, So not one cross to buy thee I'll give, if thou deny me. Since shed or cottage I have none, I sing the more, that thou hast one To whose glad threshold, and free door, I may a poet come, though poor, And eat with thee a savoury bit, Paying but common thanks for it. Yet should I chance, my Wicks, to see An over-leaven look in thee, To sour the bread, and turn the beer To an exalted vinegar: Or should'st thou prize me as a dish Of thrice-boiled worts, or third-day's fish; I'd rather hungry go and come, Than to thy house be burdensome; Yet, in my depth of grief, I'd be One that should drop his beads for thee. Who may do most, does least: the bravest will Show mercy there, where they have power to kill. Die ere long, I'm sure, I shall; After leaves, the tree must fall. For truth I may this sentence tell, No man dies ill, that liveth well . Who plants an olive, but to eat the oil? Reward, we know, is the chief end of toil . This is my comfort when she's most unkind: She can but spoil me of my means, not mind. I have my laurel chaplet on my head If, 'mongst these many numbers to be read, But one by you be hugg'd and cherished. Peruse my measures thoroughly, and where Your judgment finds a guilty poem, there Be you a judge; but not a judge severe. The mean pass by, or over, none contemn; The good applaud; the peccant less condemn, Since absolution you can give to them. Stand forth, brave man, here to the public sight; And in my book now claim a twofold right: The first as doctor, and the last as knight. This I'll tell ye by the way: Maidens, when ye leavens lay, Cross your dough, and your dispatch Will be better for your batch. In the morning when ye rise, Wash your hands and cleanse your eyes. Next be sure ye have a care To disperse the water far; For as far as that doth light, So far keeps the evil sprite. If ye fear to be affrighted When ye are by chance benighted, In your pocket for a trust Carry nothing but a crust: For that holy piece of bread Charms the danger and the dread. That prince must govern with a gentle hand Who will have love comply with his command. My dearest love, since thou wilt go, And leave me here behind thee, For love or pity let me know The place where I may find thee. In country meadows pearl'd with dew, And set about with lilies, There, filling maunds with cowslips, you May find your Amaryllis. What have the meads to do with thee, Or with thy youthful hours? Live thou at Court, where thou mayst be The queen of men, not flowers. Let country wenches make 'em fine With posies, since 'tis fitter For thee with richest gems to shine, And like the stars to glitter. You set too high a rate upon A shepherdess so homely. Believe it, dearest, there's not one I' th' Court that's half so comely. I prithee stay. I must away; Let's kiss first, then we'll sever. And though we bid adieu to-day, We shall not part for ever. Help me, Julia, for to pray, Matins sing, or matins say: This, I know, the fiend will fly Far away, if thou be'st by. Bring the holy water hither, Let us wash and pray together; When our beads are thus united, Then the foe will fly affrighted. Roses, you can never die, Since the place wherein ye lie, Heat and moisture mix'd are so As to make ye ever grow. When to thy porch I come and ravish'd see The state of poets there attending thee, Those bards and I, all in a chorus sing: We are thy prophets, Porter, thou our king. When times are troubled, then forbear; but speak When a clear day out of a cloud does break. The power of princes rests in the consent Of only those who are obedient: Which if away, proud sceptres then will lie Low, and of thrones the ancient majesty. No man so well a kingdom rules as he Who hath himself obeyed the sovereignty. Trap of a player turn'd a priest now is: Behold a sudden metamorphosis. If tithe-pigs fail, then will he shift the scene, And from a priest turn player once again. Whether I was myself, or else did see Out of myself that glorious hierarchy; Or whether those, in orders rare, or these Made up one state of sixty Venuses; Or whether fairies, syrens, nymphs they were, Or muses on their mountain sitting there; Or some enchanted place, I do not know, Or Sharon, where eternal roses grow. This I am sure: I ravished stood, as one Confus'd in utter admiration. Methought I saw them stir, and gently move, And look as all were capable of love; And in their motion smelt much like to flowers Inspir'd by th' sunbeams after dews and showers. There did I see the reverend rectress stand, Who with her eye's gleam, or a glance of hand, Those spirits raised; and with like precepts then, As with a magic, laid them all again. A happy realm! When no compulsive law, Or fear of it, but love keeps all in awe. Live you, great mistress of your arts, and be A nursing mother so to majesty, As those your ladies may in time be seen, For grace and carriage, everyone a queen. One birth their parents gave them; but their new, And better being, they receive from you. Man's former birth is graceless; but the state Of life comes in, when he's regenerate. Thou say'st I'm dull; if edgeless so I be, I'll whet my lips, and sharpen love on thee. Let me not live if I not love: Since I as yet did never prove Where pleasures met, at last do find All pleasures meet in womankind. That love 'twixt men does ever longest last Where war and peace the dice by turns do cast. Love's of itself too sweet; the best of all Is, when love's honey has a dash of gall. When Chub brings in his harvest, still he cries, Aha, my boys! here's meat for Christmas pies! Soon after he for beer so scores his wheat, That at the tide he has not bread to eat. Where pleasures rule a kingdom, never there Is sober virtue seen to move her sphere. A wearied pilgrim, I have wandered here Twice five-and-twenty, bate me but one year; Long I have lasted in this world, 'tis true, But yet those years that I have lived, but few. Who by his grey hairs doth his lusters tell, Lives not those years, but he that lives them well. One man has reach'd his sixty years, but he Of all those threescore, has not liv'd half three. He lives, who lives to virtue; men who cast Their ends for pleasure, do not live, but last. Read thou my lines, my Swetnaham; if there be A fault, 'tis hid if it be voic'd by thee. Thy mouth will make the sourest numbers please: How will it drop pure honey speaking these! Why dost thou wound and break my heart, As if we should for ever part? Hast thou not heard an oath from me, After a day, or two, or three, I would come back and live with thee? Take, if thou dost distrust that vow, This second protestation now. Upon thy cheek that spangled tear, Which sits as dew of roses there, That tear shall scarce be dried before I'll kiss the threshold of thy door. Then weep not, sweet; but thus much know, I'm half return'd before I go. I will no longer kiss, I can no longer stay; The way of all flesh is That I must go this day. Since longer I can't live, My frolic youths, adieu; My lamp to you I'll give, And all my troubles too. Nor think that thou in this my book art worst, Because not plac'd here with the midst, or first. Since fame that sides with these, or goes before Those, that must live with thee for evermore; That fame, and fame's rear'd pillar, thou shalt see In the next sheet, brave man, to follow thee. Fix on that column then, and never fall, Held up by Fame's eternal pedestal. Alas! I can't, for tell me, how Can I be gamesome, aged now? Besides, ye see me daily grow Here, winter-like, to frost and snow; And I, ere long, my girls, shall see Ye quake for cold to look on me. Truth by her own simplicity is known, Falsehood by varnish and vermilion. I have been wanton and too bold, I fear, To chafe o'ermuch the virgin's cheek or ear. Beg for my pardon, Julia: he doth win Grace with the gods who's sorry for his sin . That done, my Julia, dearest Julia, come And go with me to choose my burial room: My fates are ended; when thy Herrick dies, Clasp thou his book, then close thou up his eyes. One ear tingles; some there be That are snarling now at me: Be they those that Homer bit, I will give them thanks for it. Kings must be dauntless; subjects will contemn Those who want hearts and wear a diadem. Wanton wenches, do not bring For my hairs black colouring: For my locks, girls, let 'em be Grey or white, all's one to me. What others have with cheapness seen and ease In varnish'd maps, by th' help of compasses, Or read in volumes and those books with all Their large narrations incanonical, Thou hast beheld those seas and countries far, And tell'st to us what once they were, and are. So that with bold truth thou can'st now relate This kingdom's fortune, and that empire's fate: Can'st talk to us of Sharon, where a spring Of roses have an endless flourishing; Of Sion, Sinai, Nebo, and with them Make known to us the new Jerusalem; The Mount of Olives, Calvary, and where Is, and hast seen, thy Saviour's sepulchre. So that the man that will but lay his ears As inapostate to the thing he hears, Shall by his hearing quickly come to see The truth of travels less in books than thee. Rare is the voice itself: but when we sing To th' lute or viol, then 'tis ravishing. If kings and kingdoms once distracted be, The sword of war must try the sovereignty That prince who may do nothing but what's just, Rules but by leave, and takes his crown on trust. All are not ill plots that do sometimes fail; Nor those false vows which ofttimes don't prevail. What is't that wastes a prince? example shows, 'Tis flattery spends a king, more than his foes. Virtue's clean conclave is sobriety. The body's salt the soul is; which when gone, The flesh soon sucks in putrefaction. Against diseases here the strongest fence Is the defensive virtue, abstinence. When fear admits no hope of safety, then Although our suffering meet with no relief, An equal mind is the best sauce for grief . I have a leaden, thou a shaft of gold; Thou kill'st with heat, and I strike dead with cold. Let's try of us who shall the first expire; Or thou by frost, or I by quenchless fire: Extremes are fatal where they once do strike, And bring to th' heart destruction both alike . Whatever men for loyalty pretend, 'Tis wisdom's part to doubt a faithful friend . After thy labour take thine ease, Here with the sweet Pierides. But if so be that men will not Give thee the laurel crown for lot; Be yet assur'd, thou shall have one Not subject to corruption. I'll write no more of love; but now repent Of all those times that I in it have spent. I'll write no more of life; but wish 'twas ended, And that my dust was to the earth commended. Go thou forth, my book, though late: Yet be timely fortunate. It may chance good luck may send Thee a kinsman, or a friend, That may harbour thee, when I With my fates neglected lie. If thou know'st not where to dwell, See, the fire's by: farewell. Part of the work remains; one part is past: And here my ship rides, having anchor cast. My wearied bark, O let it now be crown'd! The haven reach'd to which I first was bound. The work is done: young men and maidens, set Upon my curls the myrtle coronet Washed with sweet ointments: thus at last I come To suffer in the Muses' martyrdom; But with this comfort, if my blood be shed, The Muses will wear blacks when I am dead. Fame's pillar here, at last, we set, Outduring marble, brass, or jet. Charm'd and enchanted so As to withstand the blow Of o v e r t h r o w; Nor shall the seas, Or o u t r a g e s Of storms o'erbear What we uprear. Tho' kingdoms fall, This pillar never shall Decline or waste at all; But stand for ever by his own Firm and well-fix'd foundation. To his book's end this last line he'd have placed: Jocund his muse was, but his life was chaste . Wherein amongst other things he sings the Birth of his CHRIST; and sighes for his Saviours suffering Look how our foul days do exceed our fair; And as our bad, more than our good works are, E'en so those lines, pen'd by my wanton wit, Treble the number of these good I've writ. Things precious are least numerous: men are prone To do ten bad for one good action. For those my unbaptised rhymes, Writ in my wild unhallowed times; For every sentence, clause, and word, That's not inlaid with Thee, my Lord, Forgive me, God, and blot each line Out of my book that is not Thine. But if, 'mongst all, thou find'st here one Worthy Thy benediction; That one of all the rest shall be The glory of my work and me. Weigh me the fire; or canst thou find A way to measure out the wind; Distinguish all those floods that are Mix'd in that watery theatre; And taste thou them as saltless there As in their channel first they were. Tell me the people that do keep Within the kingdoms of the deep; Or fetch me back that cloud again Beshiver'd into seeds of rain; Tell me the motes, dust, sands, and spears Of corn, when summer shakes his ears; Show me that world of stars, and whence They noiseless spill their influence: This if thou canst, then show me Him That rides the glorious cherubim. God is above the sphere of our esteem, And is the best known, not defining Him. God is not only said to be God hath two wings which He doth ever move; The one is mercy, and the next is love: Under the first the sinners ever trust; And with the last He still directs the just. God when He's angry here with anyone, His wrath is free from perturbation; And when we think His looks are sour and grim, The alteration is in us, not Him. 'Tis hard to find God, but to comprehend Him, as He is, is labour without end. Prayers and praises are those spotless two Lambs, by the law, which God requires as due. God ne'er afflicts us more than our desert, Though He may seem to overact His part: Sometimes He strikes us more than flesh can bear; But yet still less than grace can suffer here. Three fatal sisters wait upon each sin; First, fear and shame without, then guilt within. Suffer thy legs, but not thy tongue to walk: God, the Most Wise, is sparing of His talk. True mirth resides not in the smiling skin: The sweetest solace is to act no sin. God loads and unloads, thus His work begins, To load with blessings and unload from sins. God's boundless mercy is, to sinful man, Like to the ever-wealthy ocean: Which though it sends forth thousand streams, 'tis ne'er Known, or else seen, to be the emptier; And though it takes all in, 'tis yet no more Full, and fill'd full, than when full fill'd before. God, He rejects all prayers that are slight And want their poise: words ought to have their weight. My God, I'm wounded by my sin, And sore without, and sick within. I come to Thee, in hope to find Salve for my body and my mind. In Gilead though no balm be found To ease this smart or cure this wound, Yet, Lord, I know there is with Thee All saving health, and help for me. Then reach Thou forth that hand of Thine, That pours in oil, as well as wine, And let it work, for I'll endure The utmost smart, so Thou wilt cure. God is all fore-part; for, we never see Any part backward in the Deity. God is not only merciful to call Men to repent, but when He strikes withal. God scourgeth some severely, some He spares; But all in smart have less or greater shares. God's rod doth watch while men do sleep, and then The rod doth sleep, while vigilant are men. God, when for sin He makes His children smart, His own He acts not, but another's part; But when by stripes He saves them, then 'tis known He comes to play the part that is His own. God, as He is most holy known, So He is said to be most one. Afflictions they most profitable are To the beholder and the sufferer: Bettering them both, but by a double strain, The first by patience, and the last by pain. Do with me, God, as Thou didst deal with John, Who writ that heavenly Revelation. Let me, like him, first cracks of thunder hear, Then let the harps enchantments stroke mine ear: Here give me thorns, there, in Thy kingdom, set Upon my head the golden coronet; There give me day; but here my dreadful night: My sackcloth here; but there my stole of white. God has His whips here to a twofold end: The bad to punish, and the good t' amend. If all transgressions here should have their pay, What need there then be of a reckoning day? If God should punish no sin here of men, His providence who would not question then? Those saints which God loves best, The devil tempts not least. My God! look on me with Thine eye Of pity, not of scrutiny; For if Thou dost, Thou then shalt see Nothing but loathsome sores in me. O then, for mercy's sake, behold These my eruptions manifold, And heal me with Thy look or touch; But if Thou wilt not deign so much, Because I'm odious in Thy sight, Speak but the word, and cure me quite. God hears us when we pray, but yet defers His gifts, to exercise petitioners; And though a while He makes requesters stay, With princely hand He'll recompense delay. God strikes His Church, but 'tis to this intent, To make, not mar her, by this punishment; So where He gives the bitter pills, be sure 'Tis not to poison, but to make thee pure. God pardons those who do through frailty sin, But never those that persevere therein. In numbers, and but these few, I sing Thy birth, O JESU! Thou pretty baby, born here, With sup'rabundant scorn here; Who for Thy princely port here, Hadst for Thy place Of birth a base Out-stable for Thy court here. Instead of neat enclosures Of interwoven osiers, Instead of fragrant posies Of daffodils and roses, Thy cradle, Kingly Stranger, As Gospel tells, Was nothing else But here a homely manger. But we with silks, not crewels, And lily-work will dress Thee; And as we dispossess Thee Of clouts, we'll make a chamber, Sweet babe, for Thee Of ivory, And plaister'd round with amber. But we will entertain Thee With glories to await here, Upon Thy princely state here; And more for love than pity, From year to year, We'll make Thee, here, A freeborn of our city. In the old Scripture I have often read, The calf without meal ne'er was offered; To figure to us nothing more than this, Without the heart lip-labour nothing is. In prayer the lips ne'er act the winning part, Without the sweet concurrence of the heart. But for to teach us, all the grace is there, When we obey, by acting what we hear. When once the sin has fully acted been, Then is the horror of the trespass seen. Time was upon The wing, to fly away; And I call'd on Him but awhile to stay; But he'd be gone, For ought that I could say. He held out then A writing, as he went; And ask'd me, when False man would be content To pay again What God and Nature lent. An hour-glass, In which were sands but few, As he did pass, He show'd, and told me, too, Mine end near was; And so away he flew. If war or want shall make me grow so poor, As for to beg my bread from door to door; Lord! let me never act that beggar's part, Who hath Thee in his mouth, not in his heart: He who asks alms in that so sacred Name, Without due reverence, plays the cheater's game. Thou hast promis'd, Lord, to be With me in my misery; Suffer me to be so bold As to speak, Lord, say and hold. In the hour of my distress, When temptations me oppress, And when I my sins confess, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When I lie within my bed, Sick in heart and sick in head, And with doubts discomforted, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the house doth sigh and weep, And the world is drown'd in sleep, Yet mine eyes the watch do keep, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the artless doctor sees No one hope, but of his fees, And his skill runs on the lees, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When his potion and his pill Has, or none, or little skill, Meet for nothing, but to kill; Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the passing bell doth toll, And the furies in a shoal Come to fright a parting soul, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the tapers now burn blue, And the comforters are few, And that number more than true, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the priest his last hath prayed, And I nod to what is said, 'Cause my speech is now decayed, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When, God knows, I'm toss'd about, Either with despair, or doubt; Yet before the glass be out, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the tempter me pursu'th With the sins of all my youth, And half damns me with untruth, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the flames and hellish cries Fright mine ears, and fright mine eyes, And all terrors me surprise, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! When the judgment is reveal'd, And that open'd which was seal'd, When to Thee I have appeal'd, Sweet Spirit, comfort me! Thanksgiving for a former, doth invite God to bestow a second benefit. Bellman of night, if I about shall go For to deny my Master, do thou crow. Thou stop'dst St. Peter in the midst of sin; Stay me, by crowing, ere I do begin: Better it is, premonish'd for to shun A sin, than fall to weeping when 'tis done. Adverse and prosperous fortunes both work on Here, for the righteous man's salvation; Be he oppos'd, or be he not withstood, All serve to th' augmentation of his good. Afflictions bring us joy in times to come, When sins, by stripes, to us grow wearisome. I'll come, I'll creep, though Thou dost threat, Humbly unto Thy mercy-seat: When I am there, this then I'll do, Give Thee a dart, and dagger too; Next, when I have my faults confessed, Naked I'll show a sighing breast; Which if that can't Thy pity woo, Then let Thy justice do the rest And strike it through. Lord, Thou hast given me a cell Wherein to dwell; A little house, whose humble roof Is weather-proof; Under the spars of which I lie Both soft and dry; Where Thou my chamber for to ward Hast set a guard Of harmless thoughts, to watch and keep Me, while I sleep. Low is my porch, as is my fate, Both void of state; And yet the threshold of my door Is worn by th' poor, Who thither come, and freely get Good words or meat; Like as my parlour, so my hall And kitchen's small; A little buttery, and therein A little bin Which keeps my little loaf of bread Unclipt, unflead. Some brittle sticks of thorn or briar Make me a fire, Close by whose living coal I sit, And glow like it. Lord, I confess, too, when I dine, The pulse is Thine, And all those other bits, that be There placed by Thee; The worts, the purslain, and the mess Of water-cress, Which of Thy kindness Thou hast sent; And my content Makes those, and my beloved beet, To be more sweet. 'Tis Thou that crown'st my glittering hearth With guiltless mirth; And giv'st me wassail bowls to drink, Spiced to the brink. Lord, 'tis Thy plenty-dropping hand, That soils my land; And giv'st me for my bushel sown, Twice ten for one. Thou mak'st my teeming hen to lay Her egg each day; Besides my healthful ewes to bear Me twins each year, The while the conduits of my kine Run cream for wine. All these, and better Thou dost send Me, to this end, That I should render, for my part, A thankful heart; Which, fired with incense, I resign, As wholly Thine; But the acceptance, that must be, Make, make me Thine, my gracious God, Or with Thy staff, or with Thy rod; And be the blow, too, what it will, Lord, I will kiss it, though it kill: Beat me, bruise me, rack me, rend me, Yet, in torments, I'll commend Thee; Examine me with fire, and prove me To the full, yet I will love Thee; Nor shall Thou give so deep a wound But I as patient will be found. Lord, do not beat me, Since I do sob and cry, And swoon away to die, Ere Thou dost threat me. Lord, do not scourge me, If I by lies and oaths Have soil'd myself or clothes, But rather purge me. Happy's that man to whom God gives A stock of goods, whereby he lives Near to the wishes of his heart: No man is blest through every part. Can I not come to Thee, my God, for these So very many meeting hindrances, That slack my pace, but yet not make me stay? Who slowly goes, rids, in the end, his way. Clear Thou my paths, or shorten Thou my miles, Remove the bars, or lift me o'er the stiles; Since rough the way is, help me when I call, And take me up; or else prevent the fall. I ken my home, and it affords some ease To see far off the smoking villages. Fain would I rest, yet covet not to die For fear of future biting penury: No, no, my God, Thou know'st my wishes be To leave this life, not loving it, but Thee. Rids way , gets over the ground. Thou bid'st me come; I cannot come; for why? Thou dwell'st aloft, and I want wings to fly. To mount my soul, she must have pinions given; For 'tis no easy way from earth to heaven. Thou bid'st me come away, And I'll no longer stay Than for to shed some tears For faults of former years, And to repent some crimes Done in the present times: And next, to take a bit Of bread, and wine with it: To don my robes of love, Fit for the place above; To gird my loins about With charity throughout; And so to travel hence With feet of innocence: These done, I'll only cry God mercy, and so die. God will have all, or none; serve Him, or fall Down before Baal, Bel, or Belial: Either be hot or cold: God doth despise, Abhor, and spew out all neutralities. Whatever comes, let's be content withal: Among God's blessings there is no one small. Through all the night Thou dost me fright, And hold'st mine eyes from sleeping; And day by day, My cup can say My wine is mix'd with weeping. Thou dost my bread With ashes knead Each evening and each morrow; Do see and hear The coming in of sorrow. Thy scourge of steel, Ah me! I feel Upon me beating ever: While my sick heart With dismal smart Is disacquainted never. Long, long, I'm sure, This can't endure, But in short time 'twill please Thee, My gentle God, To burn the rod, Or strike so as to ease me. Abundant plagues I late have had, Yet none of these have made me sad: For why? My Saviour with the sense Of suff'ring gives me patience. O years! and age! farewell: Where I do know Infinity to dwell. And these mine eyes shall see All times, how they Are lost i' th' sea Of vast eternity. Where never moon shall sway The stars; but she And night shall be Drown'd in one endless day. Go, pretty child, and bear this flower Unto thy little Saviour; And tell Him, by that bud now blown, He is the Rose of Sharon known. When thou hast said so, stick it there Upon His bib or stomacher; And tell Him, for good handsel too, That thou hast brought a whistle new, Made of a clean strait oaten reed, To charm His cries at time of need. Tell Him, for coral, thou hast none, But if thou hadst, He should have one; But poor thou art, and known to be Even as moneyless as He. Lastly, if thou canst win a kiss From those mellifluous lips of His; Then never take a second on, To spoil the first impression. Let others look for pearl and gold, Tissues, or tabbies manifold: One only lock of that sweet hay Whereon the blessed baby lay, Or one poor swaddling-clout, shall be The richest New-Year's gift to me. If anything delight me for to print My book, 'tis this: that Thou, my God, art in't. How am I bound to Two! God, who doth give The mind; the king, the means whereby I live. Where God is merry, there write down thy fears: What He with laughter speaks, hear thou with tears. Give me honours! what are these, But the pleasing hindrances? Stiles, and stops, and stays that come In the way 'twixt me and home; Clear the walk, and then shall I To my heaven less run than fly. To a love-feast we both invited are: The figur'd damask, or pure diaper, Over the golden altar now is spread, With bread, and wine, and vessels furnished; The sacred towel and the holy ewer Are ready by, to make the guests all pure: Let's go, my Alma; yet, ere we receive, Fit, fit it is we have our parasceve. Who to that sweet bread unprepar'd doth come, Better be starv'd, than but to taste one crumb. God gives not only corn for need, But likewise sup'rabundant seed; Bread for our service, bread for show, Meat for our meals, and fragments too: He gives not poorly, taking some Between the finger and the thumb; But for our glut and for our store, Fine flour press'd down, and running o'er. Although we cannot turn the fervent fit Of sin, we must strive 'gainst the stream of it; And howsoe'er we have the conquest miss'd, 'Tis for our glory that we did resist. Christ, He requires still, wheresoe'er He comes To feed or lodge, to have the best of rooms: Give Him the choice; grant Him the nobler part Of all the house: the best of all's the heart. God could have made all rich, or all men poor; But why He did not, let me tell wherefore: Had all been rich, where then had patience been? Had all been poor, who had His bounty seen? To seek of God more than we well can find, Argues a strong distemper of the mind. Give, if thou canst, an alms; if not, afford, Instead of that, a sweet and gentle word: God crowns our goodness wheresoe'er He sees, On our part, wanting all abilities . Can I not sin, but thou wilt be My private protonotary? Can I not woo thee to pass by A short and sweet iniquity? I'll cast a mist and cloud upon My delicate transgression So utter dark as that no eye Shall see the hugg'd impiety; Gifts blind the wise, and bribes do please And wind all other witnesses; And wilt not thou with gold be ti'd To lay thy pen and ink aside? That in the mirk and tongueless night Wanton I may, and thou not write? It will not be. And, therefore, now, For times to come I'll make this vow, From aberrations to live free; So I'll not fear the Judge or thee. Lord, I confess, that Thou alone art able To purify this my Augean stable: Be the seas water, and the land all soap, Yet if Thy blood not wash me, there's no hope. God is all sufferance here; here He doth show No arrow nockt, only a stringless bow: His arrows fly, and all His stones are hurl'd Against the wicked in another world. I dreamt, last night, Thou didst transfuse Oil from Thy jar into my cruse; And pouring still Thy wealthy store, The vessel full did then run o'er; Methought I did Thy bounty chide To see the waste; but 'twas replied By Thee, dear God, God gives man seed Ofttimes for waste, as for his need. Then I could say that house is bare That has not bread and some to spare. God's bounty, that ebbs less and less As men do wane in thankfulness. Night hath no wings to him that cannot sleep, And time seems then not for to fly, but creep; Slowly her chariot drives, as if that she Had broke her wheel, or crack'd her axletree. Just so it is with me, who, list'ning, pray The winds to blow the tedious night away, That I might see the cheerful, peeping day. Sick is my heart! O Saviour! do Thou please To make my bed soft in my sicknesses: Lighten my candle, so that I beneath Sleep not for ever in the vaults of death; Let me Thy voice betimes i' th' morning hear: Call, and I'll come; say Thou the when, and where. Draw me but first, and after Thee I'll run And make no one stop till my race be done. I do believe that die I must, And be return'd from out my dust: I do believe that when I rise, Christ I shall see, with these same eyes: I do believe that I must come, With others, to the dreadful doom: I do believe the bad must go From thence, to everlasting woe: I do believe the good, and I, Shall live with Him eternally: I do believe I shall inherit Heaven, by Christ's mercies, not my merit. I do believe the One in Three, And Three in perfect unity: Lastly, that JESUS is a deed Of gift from God: and here's my creed. Temptations hurt not, though they have access: Satan o'ercomes none, but by willingness. When a man's faith is frozen up, as dead; Then is the lamp and oil extinguished. Sorrows our portion are: ere hence we go, Crosses we must have; or, hereafter woe. A man's transgressions God does then remit, When man He makes a penitent for it. O thou, the wonder of all days! O paragon, and pearl of praise! O virgin-martyr, ever blest Above the rest Of all the maiden train! We come, And bring fresh strewings to thy tomb. Thus, thus, and thus we compass round Thy harmless and unhaunted ground; And as we sing thy dirge, we will The daffodil And other flowers lay upon The altar of our love, thy stone. Thou wonder of all maids, liest here. Of daughters all the dearest dear; The eye of virgins; nay, the queen Of this smooth green, And all sweet meads; from whence we get The primrose and the violet. Too soon, too dear did Jephthah buy, By thy sad loss, our liberty: His was the bond and cov'nant, yet Thou paid'st the debt: Lamented maid! he won the day, But for the conquest thou didst pay. Thy father brought with him along The olive branch and victor's song: He slew the Ammonites, we know, But to thy woe; And in the purchase of our peace, The cure was worse than the disease. For which obedient zeal of thine, We offer here, before thy shrine, Our sighs for storax, tears for wine; And to make fine And fresh thy hearse-cloth, we will, here, Four times bestrew thee ev'ry year. Receive, for this thy praise, our tears: Receive this offering of our hairs: Receive these crystal vials fill'd With tears distill'd From teeming eyes; to these we bring, Each maid, her silver filleting, To gild thy tomb; besides, these cauls, These laces, ribbons, and these falls, These veils, wherewith we use to hide The bashful bride, When we conduct her to her groom: And all we lay upon thy tomb. No more, no more, since thou art dead, Shall we e'er bring coy brides to bed; No more, at yearly festivals We cowslip balls Or chains of columbines shall make For this or that occasion's sake. No, no; our maiden pleasures be Wrapp'd in the winding-sheet with thee: 'Tis we are dead, though not i' th' grave: Or, if we have One seed of life left, 'tis to keep A Lent for thee, to fast and weep. Sleep in thy peace, thy bed of spice, And make this place all paradise: May sweets grow here: and smoke from hence Fat frankincense: Let balm and cassia send their scent From out thy maiden-monument. May no wolf howl, or screech-owl stir A wing about thy sepulchre! No boisterous winds, or storms, come hither To starve or wither Thy soft sweet earth! but, like a spring, Love keep it ever flourishing. May all shy maids, at wonted hours, Come forth to strew thy tomb with flow'rs: May virgins, when they come to mourn, Male-incense burn Upon thine altar! then return, And leave thee sleeping in thy urn. What though my harp and viol be Both hung upon the willow tree? What though my bed be now my grave, And for my house I darkness have? What though my healthful days are fled, And I lie number'd with the dead? Yet I have hope, by Thy great power, To spring; though now a wither'd flower. Shame checks our first attempts ; but then 'tis prov'd Sins first dislik'd are after that belov'd . Sin leads the way, but as it goes, it feels The following plague still treading on his heels. God, when He takes my goods and chattels hence, Gives me a portion, giving patience: He patience gives, He gives Himself to me. What here we hope for, we shall once inherit; By faith we all walk here, not by the Spirit. Humble we must be, if to heaven we go: High is the roof there; but the gate is low: Whene'er thou speak'st, look with a lowly eye: Grace is increased by humility. Our present tears here, not our present laughter, Are but the handsels of our joys hereafter. After true sorrow for our sins, our strife Must last with Satan to the end of life. If Thy smart rod Here did not make me sorry, I should not be In Thy eternal glory. But since Thou didst convince My sins by gently striking; Add still to those First stripes new blows, According to Thy liking. Or scourging tear me; That thus from vices driven, I may from hell Fly up to dwell With Thee and Thine in heaven. What God gives, and what we take, 'Tis a gift for Christ, His sake: Be the meal of beans and peas, God be thanked for those and these: Have we flesh, or have we fish, All are fragments from His dish. He His Church save, and the king; And our peace here, like a spring, Make it ever flourishing. Honour thy parents; but good manners call Thee to adore thy God the first of all. Here a little child I stand Heaving up my either hand; Cold as paddocks though they be, Here I lift them up to Thee, For a benison to fall On our meat and on us all. Amen. What sweeter music can we bring, Than a carol for to sing The birth of this our heavenly King? Awake the voice! awake the string! Heart, ear, and eye, and everything Awake! the while the active finger Runs division with the singer. And give the honour to this day That sees December turn'd to May. The why and wherefore all things here Seem like the spring-time of the year. Smile like a field beset with corn? Or smell like to a mead new shorn, Thus, on the sudden? The cause, why things thus fragrant be: 'Tis He is born, whose quick'ning birth Gives life and lustre, public mirth, To heaven and the under-earth. We see Him come, and know Him ours, Who, with His sunshine and His showers, Turns all the patient ground to flowers. And fit it is we find a room To welcome Him. Of all the house here is the heart, Which we will give Him; and bequeath This holly and this ivy wreath, To do Him honour; who's our King, And Lord of all this revelling. And not with lutes to fill the room. And have a care no fire goes out, But 'cense the porch and place throughout. The storax fries; and ye may see How heart and hand do all agree To make things sweet. Yet all less sweet than He. And tell us then, whenas thou seest His gently-gliding, dove-like eyes, And hear'st His whimpering and His cries; How can'st thou this Babe circumcise? For, now unless ye see Him bleed, Which makes the bapti'm, 'tis decreed The birth is fruitless. Then the work God speed. Spring tulips up through all the year; And from His sacred blood, here shed, May roses grow to crown His own dear head. Back, back again; each thing is done With zeal alike, as 'twas begun; Now singing, homeward let us carry The Babe unto His mother Mary; And when we have the Child commended To her warm bosom, then our rites are ended. With anything unhallowed here; No jot of leaven must be found Conceal'd in this most holy ground. Leave that without, then enter in; But let no Christmas mirth begin Before ye purge and circumcise Your hearts, and hands, lips, ears, and eyes. That all things sweet and clean may be: For here's a Babe that, like a bride, Will blush to death if ought be spi'd Ill-scenting, or unpurifi'd. The room is 'cens'd: help, help t' invoke Heaven to come down, the while we choke The temple with a cloud of smoke. Of Him, who's Lord of Heaven and Earth: Because the pretty Babe does bleed. Poor pitied Child! who from Thy stall Bring'st, in Thy blood, a balm that shall Be the best New-Year's gift to all. His praise, so let us bless the King. Long may He live till He hath told His New-Years trebled to His old: And when that's done, to re-aspire A new-born Phnix from His own chaste fire. When I shall sin, pardon my trespass here; For once in hell, none knows remission there. Sin once reached up to God's eternal sphere, And was committed, not remitted there. Evil no nature hath; the loss of good Is that which gives to sin a livelihood. Where is the Babe but lately sprung? Lies he the lily-banks among? Sleeps, laid within some ark of flowers, Spangled with dew-light; thou canst clear All doubts, and manifest the where. Him in the morning's blushing cheek, Or search the beds of spices through, To find him out. No, this ye need not do; But only come and see Him rest A Princely Babe in's mother's breast. He's seen, He's seen! why then a round, Let's kiss the sweet and holy ground; And all rejoice that we have found A King before conception crown'd . Unto our pretty Twelfth-tide King, Each one his several offering; And when night comes, we'll give Him wassailing; And that His treble honours may be seen, We'll choose Him King, and make His mother Queen. With golden censers, and with incense, here Before Thy virgin-altar I appear, To pay Thee that I owe, since what I see In, or without, all, all belongs to Thee. Where shall I now begin to make, for one Least loan of Thine, half restitution? Alas! I cannot pay a jot; therefore I'll kiss the tally, and confess the score. Ten thousand talents lent me, Thou dost write; 'Tis true, my God, but I can't pay one mite. Tally , the record of his score or debt. I'll hope no more For things that will not come; And if they do, they prove but cumbersome. Wealth brings much woe; And, since it fortunes so, 'Tis better to be poor Than so t' abound As to be drown'd Or overwhelm'd with store. Pale care, avaunt! I'll learn to be content With that small stock Thy bounty gave or lent. What may conduce To my most healthful use, Almighty God, me grant; But that, or this, That hurtful is, Deny Thy suppliant. Gold I have none, but I present my need, O Thou, that crown'st the will, where wants the deed. Where rams are wanting, or large bullocks' thighs, There a poor lamb's a plenteous sacrifice. Take then his vows, who, if he had it, would Devote to Thee both incense, myrrh and gold Upon an altar rear'd by him, and crown'd Both with the ruby, pearl, and diamond. Permit mine eyes to see Part, or the whole of Thee, O happy place! Where all have grace, And garlands shar'd, For their reward; Where each chaste soul In long white stole, And palms in hand, Do ravish'd stand; So in a ring, The praises sing That fill the Throne; While harps and viols then To voices say, Amen. Last night I drew up mine account, And found my debits to amount To such a height, as for to tell How I should pay 's impossible. Well, this I'll do: my mighty score Thy mercy-seat I'll lay before; But therewithal I'll bring the band Which, in full force, did daring stand Till my Redeemer, on the tree, Made void for millions, as for me. Then, if thou bidst me pay, or go Unto the prison, I'll say, no; Christ having paid, I nothing owe: For, this is sure, the debt is dead God makes not good men wantons, but doth bring Them to the field, and, there, to skirmishing. With trials those, with terrors these He proves, And hazards those most whom the most He loves; For Sceva, darts; for Cocles, dangers; thus He finds a fire for mighty Mutius; Death for stout Cato; and besides all these, A poison, too, He has for Socrates; Torments for high Attilius; and, with want, Brings in Fabricius for a combatant: He never brings them once to th' push of pikes. Play their offensive and defensive parts, Till they be hid o'er with a wood of darts. When man is punish'd, he is plagued still, Not for the fault of nature, but of will. Open thy gates To him, who weeping waits, And might come in, But that held back by sin. Let mercy be So kind to set me free, And I will straight Come in, or force the gate. All I have lost that could be rapt from me; And fare it well: yet, Herrick, if so be Thy dearest Saviour renders thee but one Smile, that one smile's full restitution. Pardon me, God, once more I Thee entreat, That I have placed Thee in so mean a seat Where round about Thou seest but all things vain, Uncircumcis'd, unseason'd and profane. But as Heaven's public and immortal eye Looks on the filth, but is not soil'd thereby, So Thou, my God, may'st on this impure look, But take no tincture from my sinful book: Let but one beam of glory on it shine, And that will make me and my work divine. Lord, I am like to mistletoe, Which has no root, and cannot grow Or prosper but by that same tree It clings about; so I by Thee. What need I then to fear at all, So long as I about Thee crawl? But if that tree should fall and die, Tumble shall heav'n, and down will I. I would to God that mine old age might have Before my last, but here a living grave, Some one poor almshouse; there to lie, or stir Ghostlike, as in my meaner sepulchre; A little piggin and a pipkin by, To hold things fitting my necessity, Which rightly used, both in their time and place, Might me excite to fore and after-grace. Thy Cross, my Christ, fix'd 'fore mine eyes should be, Not to adore that, but to worship Thee. So, here the remnant of my days I'd spend, Reading Thy Bible, and my Book; so end. When we 'gainst Satan stoutly fight, the more He tears and tugs us than he did before; Neglecting once to cast a frown on those Whom ease makes his without the help of blows. Hell is no other but a soundless pit, Where no one beam of comfort peeps in it. When I a ship see on the seas, Cuff'd with those wat'ry savages, And therewithal behold it hath In all that way no beaten path, Then, with a wonder, I confess Thou art our way i' th' wilderness; And while we blunder in the dark, Thou art our candle there, or spark. The less our sorrows here and suff'rings cease, The more our crowns of glory there increase. Hell is the place where whipping-cheer abounds, But no one jailer there to wash the wounds. Along the dark and silent night, With my lantern and my light, And the tinkling of my bell, Thus I walk, and this I tell: Death and dreadfulness call on To the gen'ral session, To whose dismal bar we there All accounts must come to clear. Scores of sins w'ave made here many, Wip'd out few, God knows, if any. Rise, ye debtors, then, and fall To make payment while I call. Ponder this, when I am gone; By the clock 'tis almost one. When winds and seas do rage And threaten to undo me, Thou dost, their wrath assuage If I but call unto Thee. A mighty storm last night Did seek my soul to swallow, But by the peep of light A gentle calm did follow. What need I then despair, Though ills stand round about me; Since mischiefs neither dare To bark or bite without Thee? Come pity us, all ye who see Our harps hung on the willow tree: Come pity us, ye passers-by Who see or hear poor widows cry: Come pity us; and bring your ears And eyes to pity widows' tears. And when you are come hither Then we will keep A fast, and weep Our eyes out altogether. For Tabitha, who dead lies here, Clean washed, and laid out for the bier, O modest matrons, weep and wail! For now the corn and wine must fail: The basket and the bin of bread, Wherewith so many souls were fed, Stand empty here for ever: And ah! the poor At thy worn door Shall be relieved never. Woe worth the time, woe worth the day That 'reaved us of thee, Tabitha! For we have lost with thee the meal, The bits, the morsels, and the deal Of gentle paste and yielding dough That thou on widows did'st bestow. All's gone, and death hath taken Away from us Our maundy; thus Thy widows stand forsaken. Ah, Dorcas, Dorcas! now adieu We bid the cruse and pannier too: Ay, and the flesh, for and the fish Doled to us in that lordly dish. We take our leaves now of the loom From whence the housewives' cloth did come: The web affords now nothing; Thou being dead, The worsted thread Is cut, that made us clothing. Farewell the flax and reaming wool With which thy house was plentiful; Farewell the coats, the garments, and The sheets, the rugs, made by thy hand; Farewell thy fire and thy light That ne'er went out by day or night: No, or thy zeal so speedy, That found a way By peep of day, To feed and cloth the needy. But, ah, alas! the almond bough And olive branch is withered now. The wine press now is ta'en from us, The saffron and the calamus. The spice and spikenard hence is gone, The storax and the cinnamon. The carol of our gladness Has taken wing, And our late spring Of mirth is turned to sadness. How wise wast thou in all thy ways! How worthy of respect and praise! How matron-like didst thou go dressed! How soberly above the rest Of those that prank it with their plumes, And jet it with their choice perfumes! Thy vestures were not flowing: Nor did the street Accuse thy feet Of mincing in their going. And though thou here li'st dead, we see A deal of beauty yet in thee. How sweetly shows thy smiling face, Thy lips with all-diffused grace! Thy hands, though cold, yet spotless white, And comely as the chrysolite! Thy belly like a hill is, Or as a neat Clean heap of wheat, All set about with lilies. Sleep with thy beauties here, while we Will show these garments made by thee; These were the coats, in these are read The monuments of Dorcas dead. These were thy acts, and thou shall have These hung as honours o'er thy grave; And after us, distressed, Thy very tomb Would cry out, Thou art blessed. Rapine has yet took nought from me; But if it please my God I be Brought at the last to th' utmost bit, God make me thankful still for it. I have been grateful for my store: Let me say grace when there's no more. That little pretty bleeding part Of foreskin send to me: And I'll return a bleeding heart For New-Year's gift to Thee. Rich is the gem that Thou did'st send, Mine's faulty too and small; But yet this gift Thou wilt commend Because I send Thee all. Let not that day God's friends and servants scare; The bench is then their place, and not the bar. The sup'rabundance of my store, That is the portion of the poor: Wheat, barley, rye, or oats; what is't But He takes toll of? all the grist. Two raiments have I: Christ then makes This law; that He and I part stakes. Or have I two loaves, then I use The poor to cut, and I to choose. In this world, the isle of dreams, While we sit by sorrow's streams, Tears and terrors are our themes But when once from hence we fly, More and more approaching nigh Unto young Eternity In that whiter island, where Things are evermore sincere; Candour here, and lustre there There no monstrous fancies shall Out of hell an horror call, To create, or cause at all, There in calm and cooling sleep We our eyes shall never steep; But eternal watch shall keep, Pleasures, such as shall pursue Me immortalised, and you; And fresh joys, as never to Have ending. I crawl, I creep; my Christ, I come To Thee for curing balsamum: Thou hast, nay more, Thou art the tree Affording salve of sovereignty. My mouth I'll lay unto Thy wound Bleeding, that no blood touch the ground: For, rather than one drop shall fall To waste, my JESU, I'll take all. God! to my little meal and oil Add but a bit of flesh to boil: And Thou my pipkinet shalt see, Give a wave-off'ring unto Thee. God He refuseth no man, but makes way For all that now come or hereafter may. God's grace deserves here to be daily fed That, thus increased, it might be perfected. To him who longs unto his Christ to go, Celerity even itself is slow. God had but one Son free from sin; but none Of all His sons free from correction. God, as He's potent, so He's likewise known To give us more than hope can fix upon. Science in God is known to be A substance, not a quality. Christ, I have read, did to His chaplains say, Sending them forth, Salute no man by th' way: Not that He taught His ministers to be Unsmooth or sour to all civility, But to instruct them to avoid all snares Manners are good; but till His errand ends, Salute we must nor strangers, kin, or friends. Lasciviousness is known to be The sister to saturity. God from our eyes all tears hereafter wipes, And gives His children kisses then, not stripes. In vain our labours are whatsoe'er they be, Unless God gives the benedicite. God is His name of nature; but that word Implies His power when He's called the Lord. God hides from man the reck'ning day, that he May fear it ever for uncertainty; That being ignorant of that one, he may Expect the coming of it every day. Angels are called gods; yet of them, none Are gods but by participation: As just men are entitled gods, yet none Are gods of them but by adoption. The longer thread of life we spin, The more occasion still to sin. The tears of saints more sweet by far Than all the songs of sinners are. That manna, which God on His people cast, Fitted itself to ev'ry feeder's taste. True rev'rence is, as Cassiodore doth prove, The fear of God commix'd with cleanly love. Mercy, the wise Athenians held to be Not an affection, but a deity. After this life, the wages shall Not shared alike be unto all. God tempteth no one, as St. Austin saith, For any ill, but for the proof of faith; Unto temptation God exposeth some, But none of purpose to be overcome. God's hands are round and smooth, that gifts may fall Freely from them and hold none back at all. Labour we must, and labour hard I' th' forum here, or vineyard. The time the bridegroom stays from hence Is but the time of penitence. Roaring is nothing but a weeping part Forced from the mighty dolour of the heart. He that is hurt seeks help : sin is the wound; The salve for this i' th' Eucharist is found. God in His own day will be then severe To punish great sins, who small faults whipt here. The mountains of the Scriptures are, some say, Moses, and Jesus, called Joshua: The prophets, mountains of the Old are meant, Th' apostles, mounts of the New Testament. A prayer that is said alone Starves, having no companion. Great things ask for when thou dost pray, And those great are which ne'er decay. Pray not for silver, rust eats this; Ask not for gold, which metal is; Nor yet for houses, which are here But earth: such vows ne'er reach God's ear . Christ was not sad, i' th' garden, for His own Passion, but for His sheep's dispersion. God, who's in heaven, will hear from thence; If not to th' sound, yet to the sense. God, as the learned Damascene doth write, A sea of substance is, indefinite. He that ascended in a cloud, shall come In clouds descending to the public doom. The same who crowns the conqueror, will be A coadjutor in the agony. Heaven is most fair; but fairer He That made that fairest canopy. In God there's nothing, but 'tis known to be Even God Himself, in perfect entity. God can do all things, save but what are known For to imply a contradiction. Christ, when He hung the dreadful cross upon, Had, as it were, a dereliction In this regard, in those great terrors He Had no one beam from God's sweet majesty. Jehovah, as Botius saith, No number of the plural hath. God then confounds man's face when He not bears The vows of those who are petitioners. The shame of man's face is no more Than prayers repell'd, says Cassiodore. Jacob God's beggar was; and so we wait, Though ne'er so rich, all beggars at His gate. The bad among the good are here mix'd ever; The good without the bad are here plac'd never. Sin no existence; nature none it hath, Or good at all , as learned Aquinas saith. The repetition of the name made known No other than Christ's full affection. God on our youth bestows but little ease; But on our age most sweet indulgences. God is so potent, as His power can Draw out of bad a sovereign good to man. Paradise is, as from the learn'd I gather, A choir of bless'd souls circling in the Father . One part thereof left still unfinished, To make them thereby mindful of their own City's most sad and dire destruction. God did forbid the Israelites to bring An ass unto Him for an offering, Only, by this dull creature, to express His detestation to all slothfulness. The Virgin Mother stood at distance, there, From her Son's cross, not shedding once a tear, Because the law forbad to sit and cry For those who did as malefactors die. So she, to keep her mighty woes in awe, Tortured her love not to transgress the law. Observe we may, how Mary Joses then, And th' other Mary, Mary Magdalen, Sat by the grave; and sadly sitting there, Shed for their Master many a bitter tear; But 'twas not till their dearest Lord was dead And then to weep they both were licensed. Those tapers which we set upon the grave In fun'ral pomp, but this importance have: That souls departed are not put out quite; But as they walked here in their vestures white, So live in heaven in everlasting light. One birth our Saviour had; the like none yet Was, or will be a second like to it. To work a wonder, God would have her shown At once a bud and yet a rose full-blown. As sunbeams pierce the glass, and streaming in, No crack or schism leave i' th' subtle skin: So the Divine Hand worked and brake no thread, But, in a mother, kept a maidenhead. God, in the holy tongue, they call The place that filleth all in all. God's said to leave this place, and for to come Nearer to that place than to other some, Of local motion, in no least respect, But only by impression of effect. God is Jehovah call'd: which name of His Implies or Essence, or the He that Is. God's evident, and may be said to be Present with just men, to the verity; But with the wicked if He doth comply, 'Tis, as St. Bernard saith, but seemingly. God's said to dwell there, wheresoever He Puts down some prints of His high Majesty; As when to man He comes, and there doth place His Holy Spirit, or doth plant His Grace. The Virgin Mary was, as I have read, The House of God, by Christ inhabited; Into the which He entered, but, the door Once shut, was never to be open'd more. God's undivided, One in Persons Three, And Three in inconfused unity. Original of Essence there is none, And though the Father be the first of Three, 'Tis but by order, not by entity. So long, it seem'd, as Mary's faith was small, Christ did her woman, not her Mary call; But no more woman, being strong in faith, But Mary call'd then, as St. Ambrose saith. Placed north and south for these clean purposes; That man's uncomely froth might not molest God's ways and walks, which lie still east and west. Sabbaths are threefold, as St. Austin says: The first of time, or Sabbath here of days; The second is a conscience trespass-free; The last the Sabbath of Eternity. Noah the first was, as tradition says, That did ordain the fast of forty days. There is no evil that we do commit, But hath th' extraction of some good from it: As when we sin, God, the great Chemist, thence Draws out th' elixir of true penitence. God is more here than in another place, Not by His essence, but commerce of grace. God hath this world for many made, 'tis true: But He hath made the World to Come for few. God gives to none so absolute an ease As not to know or feel some grievances. Paul, he began ill, but he ended well; Judas began well, but he foully fell: In godliness not the beginnings so Much as the ends are to be look'd unto. These temporal goods God, the most wise, commends To th' good and bad in common for two ends: First, that these goods none here may o'er-esteem Because the wicked do partake of them; Next, that these ills none cowardly may shun, Being, oft here, the just man's portion. The fire of hell this strange condition hath, To burn, not shine, as learned Basil saith. Speak, did the blood of Abel cry To God for vengeance? Yes, say I, Ev'n as the sprinkled blood called on God for an expiation. The blood of Abel was a thing Of such a rev'rend reckoning, As that the old world thought it fit Especially to swear by it. One man repentant is of more esteem With God, than one that never sinned 'gainst Him. The doctors, in the Talmud, say, That in this world one only day In true repentance spent will be More worth than heaven's eternity. God's present everywhere, but most of all Present by union hypostatical: God, He is there, where's nothing else, schools say, And nothing else is there where He's away. For each one body that i' th' earth is sown, There's an uprising but of one for one; But for each grain that in the ground is thrown, Threescore or fourscore spring up thence for one: So that the wonder is not half so great Of ours as is the rising of the wheat. Justly our dearest Saviour may abhor us, Who hath more suffered by us far, than for us. Sinners confounded are a twofold way, Either as when, the learned schoolmen say, Men's sins destroyed are when they repent, Or when, for sins, men suffer punishment. No man is tempted so but may o'ercome, If that he has a will to masterdom. God doth embrace the good with love; and gains The good by mercy, as the bad by pains. God bought man here with His heart's blood expense; And man sold God here for base thirty pence. Christ never did so great a work but there His human nature did in part appear; Or ne'er so mean a piece but men might see Therein some beams of His Divinity: So that in all He did there did combine His human nature and His part divine. Predestination is the cause alone Of many standing, but of fall to none. Art thou not destin'd? then with haste go on To make thy fair predestination: If thou can'st change thy life, God then will please To change, or call back, His past sentences. Sin never slew a soul unless there went Along with it some tempting blandishment. Sin is an act so free, that if we shall Say 'tis not free, 'tis then no sin at all. Sin is the cause of death; and sin's alone The cause of God's predestination: And from God's prescience of man's sin doth flow Our destination to eternal woe. God's prescience makes none sinful; but th' offence Of man's the chief cause of God's prescience. To all our wounds here, whatsoe'er they be, Christ is the one sufficient remedy. Christ took our nature on Him, not that He 'Bove all things loved it for the purity: No, but He dress'd Him with our human trim, Because our flesh stood most in need of Him. Heaven is not given for our good works here; Yet it is given to the labourer. God has four keys, which He reserves alone: The first of rain; the key of hell next known; With the third key He opes and shuts the womb; And with the fourth key he unlocks the tomb. There's no constraint to do amiss, Whereas but one enforcement is. Give unto all, lest he, whom thou deni'st, May chance to be no other man but Christ. One only fire has hell; but yet it shall Not after one sort there excruciate all: But look, how each transgressor onward went Boldly in sin, shall feel more punishment. Is this a fast, to keep The larder lean? And clean From fat of veals and sheep? Is it to quit the dish Of flesh, yet still To fill The platter high with fish? Is it to fast an hour, Or ragg'd to go, Or show A downcast look and sour? No; 'tis a fast to dole Thy sheaf of wheat, And meat, Unto the hungry soul. It is to fast from strife, From old debate And hate; To circumcise thy life. To show a heart grief-rent; To starve thy sin, Not bin; And that's to keep thy Lent. By hours we all live here; in Heaven is known No spring of time, or time's succession. Be those few hours, which I have yet to spend, Blest with the meditation of my end: Though they be few in number, I'm content: If otherwise, I stand indifferent. Nor makes it matter Nestor's years to tell, If man lives long and if he live not well. A multitude of days still heaped on, Seldom brings order, but confusion. Might I make choice, long life should be withstood; Nor would I care how short it were, if good: Which to effect, let ev'ry passing-bell Possess my thoughts, Next comes my doleful knell: And when the night persuades me to my bed, I'll think I'm going to be buried. So shall the blankets which come over me Present those turfs which once must cover me: And with as firm behaviour I will meet The sheet I sleep in as my winding-sheet. When sleep shall bathe his body in mine eyes, I will believe that then my body dies: And if I chance to wake and rise thereon, I'll have in mind my resurrection, Which must produce me to that General Doom, To which the peasant, so the prince, must come, To hear the Judge give sentence on the throne, Without the least hope of affection. Tears, at that day, shall make but weak defence, When hell and horror fright the conscience. Let me, though late, yet at the last, begin To shun the least temptation to a sin; Though to be tempted be no sin, until Man to th' alluring object gives his will. Such let my life assure me, when my breath Goes thieving from me, I am safe in death; Which is the height of comfort: when I fall, I rise triumphant in my funeral. Those garments lasting evermore, Are works of mercy to the poor, Which neither tettar, time, or moth Shall fray that silk or fret this cloth. Come to me, God; but do not come In power; or come Thou in that state When Thou Thy laws did'st promulgate, Whenas the mountain quaked for dread, And sullen clouds bound up his head. No; lay Thy stately terrors by To talk with me familiarly; For if Thy thunder-claps I hear, I shall less swoon than die for fear. Speak Thou of love and I'll reply Or sing of mercy and I'll suit To it my viol and my lute; Thus let Thy lips but love distil, Then come, my God, and hap what will. When once the soul has lost her way, O then how restless does she stray! And having not her God for light, How does she err in endless night! In doing justice God shall then be known, Who showing mercy here, few prized, or none. We merit all we suffer, and by far More stripes than God lays on the sufferer. God suffers not His saints and servants dear To have continual pain or pleasure here; But look how night succeeds the day, so He Gives them by turns their grief and jollity. God is all-present to whate'er we do, And as all-present, so all-filling too. That there's a God we all do know, But what God is we cannot show. Tell me, rich man, for what intent Thou load'st with gold thy vestiment? Whenas the poor cry out: To us Belongs all gold superfluous. God has a right hand, but is quite bereft Of that which we do nominate the left. Two instruments belong unto our God: The one a staff is and the next a rod; That if the twig should chance too much to smart, The staff might come to play the friendly part. God still rewards us more than our desert; But when He strikes, He quarter-acts His part. Confession twofold is, as Austin says, The first of sin is, and the next of praise. If ill it goes with thee, thy faults confess: If well, then chant God's praise with cheerfulness. God is then said for to descend, when He Doth here on earth some thing of novity; As when in human nature He works more Than ever yet the like was done before. Good and great God! how should I fear To come to Thee if Christ not there! Could I but think He would not be Present to plead my cause for me, To hell I'd rather run than I Would see Thy face and He not by. Though Thou be'st all that active love Which heats those ravished souls above; And though all joys spring from the glance Of Thy most winning countenance; Yet sour and grim Thou'dst seem to me If through my Christ I saw not Thee. That Christ did die, the pagan saith; But that He rose, that's Christians' faith. We are co-heirs with Christ; nor shall His own Heirship be less by our adoption. The number here of heirs shall from the state Of His great birthright nothing derogate. God hates the dual number, being known The luckless number of division; And when He bless'd each sev'ral day whereon He did His curious operation, 'Tis never read there, as the fathers say, God bless'd His work done on the second day; Wherefore two prayers ought not to be said, Or by ourselves, or from the pulpit read. God's said our hearts to harden then, Whenas His grace not supples men. Before man's fall the rose was born, St. Ambrose says, without the thorn; But for man's fault then was the thorn Without the fragrant rose-bud born; But ne'er the rose without the thorn. God doth not promise here to man that He Will free him quickly from his misery; But in His own time, and when He thinks fit, Then He will give a happy end to it. The strength of baptism that's within, It saves the soul by drowning sin. Gold serves for tribute to the king, The frankincense for God's off'ring. God, who me gives a will for to repent, Will add a power to keep me innocent; That I shall ne'er that trespass recommit When I have done true penance here for it. When well we speak and nothing do that's good, We not divide the hoof, but chew the cud; But when good words by good works have their proof, We then both chew the cud and cleave the hoof. Thy former coming was to cure My soul's most desp'rate calenture; Thy second advent, that must be To heal my earth's infirmity. Calenture , delirium caused by excessive heat. As my little pot doth boil, We will keep this level-coil, That a wave and I will bring To my God a heave-offering. God can't be wrathful: but we may conclude Wrathful He may be by similitude: God's wrathful said to be, when He doth do That without wrath which wrath doth force us to. In God's commands ne'er ask the reason why; Let thy obedience be the best reply. If I have played the truant, or have here Failed in my part, oh! Thou that art my dear, My mild, my loving tutor, Lord and God! Correct my errors gently with Thy rod. I know that faults will many here be found, But where sin swells there let Thy grace abound. The work is done; now let my laurel be Given by none but by Thyself to me: That done, with honour Thou dost me create Thy poet, and Thy prophet Laureate. Put off Thy robe of purple, then go on To the sad place of execution: Thine hour is come, and the tormentor stands Ready to pierce Thy tender feet and hands. Long before this, the base, the dull, the rude, Th' inconstant and unpurged multitude Yawn for Thy coming; some ere this time cry, How He defers, how loath He is to die! Amongst this scum, the soldier with his spear And that sour fellow with his vinegar, His sponge, and stick, do ask why Thou dost stay; So do the scurf and bran too. Go Thy way, Thy way, Thou guiltless man, and satisfy By Thine approach each their beholding eye. Not as a thief shalt Thou ascend the mount, But like a person of some high account; The Cross shall be Thy stage, and Thou shalt there The spacious field have for Thy theatre. Thou art that Roscius and that marked-out man That must this day act the tragedian To wonder and affrightment: Thou art He Whom all the flux of nations comes to see, Not those poor thieves that act their parts with Thee; Those act without regard, when once a king And God, as Thou art, comes to suffering. No, no; this scene from Thee takes life, and sense, And soul, and spirit, plot and excellence. Why then, begin, great King! ascend Thy throne, And thence proceed to act Thy Passion To such an height, to such a period raised, As hell, and earth, and heav'n may stand amazed. God and good angels guide Thee; and so bless Thee in Thy several parts of bitterness, That those who see Thee nail'd unto the tree May, though they scorn Thee, praise and pity Thee. And we, Thy lovers, while we see Thee keep The laws of action, will both sigh and weep, And bring our spices to embalm Thee dead; That done, we'll see Thee sweetly buried. When Thou wast taken, Lord, I oft have read, All Thy disciples Thee forsook and fled. Let their example not a pattern be For me to fly, but now to follow Thee. If Thou be'st taken, God forbid I fly from Thee, as others did: But if Thou wilt so honour me As to accept my company, I'll follow Thee, hap hap what shall, Both to the judge and judgment hall: And, if I see Thee posted there, To be all-flayed with whipping-cheer, I'll take my share; or else, my God, Thy stripes I'll kiss, or burn the rod. Have, have ye no regard, all ye Who pass this way, to pity Me, Who am a man of misery! A man both bruis'd, and broke, and one Who suffers not here for Mine own, But for My friends' transgression! Ah! Sion's daughters, do not fear The cross, the cords, the nails, the spear, The myrrh, the gall, the vinegar; For Christ, your loving Saviour, hath Drunk up the wine of God's fierce wrath; Only there's left a little froth, Less for to taste than for to show What bitter cups had been your due, Had He not drank them up for you. When I behold Thee, almost slain, With one and all parts full of pain: When I Thy gentle heart do see Pierced through and dropping blood for me, I'll call, and cry out, thanks to Thee. That for my sin Thou, Thou must drink, Even Thou alone, the bitter cup Of fury and of vengeance up. Lord, I'll not see Thee to drink all The vinegar, the myrrh, the gall: But I will sip a little wine; Which done, Lord, say: The rest is Mine. This crosstree here Doth Jesus bear, Who sweet'ned first The death accurs'd. Here all things ready are, make haste, make haste away; For long this work will be, and very short this day. Why then, go on to act: here's wonders to be done Before the last least sand of Thy ninth hour be run; Or ere dark clouds do dull or dead the mid-day's sun. Act when Thou wilt, Blood will be spilt; Pure balm, that shall Bring health to all. Why then, begin To pour first in Some drops of wine, Instead of brine, To search the wound So long unsound: And, when that's done, Let oil next run To cure the sore Sin made before. And O! dear Christ, E'en as Thou di'st, Look down, and see Us weep for Thee. And tho', love knows, Thy dreadful woes We cannot ease, Yet do Thou please, Who mercy art, T' accept each heart That gladly would Help if it could. Beneath this tree, This honour have, To make my grave. Hail, holy and all-honour'd tomb, By no ill haunted; here I come, With shoes put off, to tread thy room. I'll not profane by soil of sin Thy door as I do enter in; For I have washed both hand and heart, This, that, and every other part, So that I dare, with far less fear Than full affection, enter here. Thus, thus I come to kiss Thy stone With a warm lip and solemn one: And as I kiss I'll here and there Dress Thee with flow'ry diaper. How sweet this place is! as from hence Flowed all Panchaia's frankincense; Or rich Arabia did commix, Here, all her rare aromatics. Let me live ever here, and stir No one step from this sepulchre. Ravish'd I am! and down I lie Confused in this brave ecstasy. Here let me rest; and let me have This for my heaven that was Thy grave: And, coveting no higher sphere, I'll my eternity spend here. To join with them who here confer Gifts to my Saviour's sepulchre, Devotion bids me hither bring Somewhat for my thank-offering. Lo! thus I bring a virgin flower, To dress my Maiden Saviour. Hence they have borne my Lord; behold! the stone Is rolled away and my sweet Saviour's gone. Tell me, white angel, what is now become Of Him we lately sealed up in this tomb? Is He, from hence, gone to the shades beneath, To vanquish hell as here He conquered death? If so, I'll thither follow without fear, And live in hell if that my Christ stays there. Of all the good things whatsoe'er we do, God is the , and the  too. Whose head, befringed with bescattered tresses, Shows like Apollo's when the morn he dresses, Or like Aurora when with pearl she sets Her long, dishevell'd, rose-crown'd trammelets: Her forehead smooth, full, polish'd, bright and high Bears in itself a graceful majesty, Under the which two crawling eyebrows twine Like to the tendrils of a flatt'ring vine, Under whose shade two starry sparkling eyes Are beautifi'd with fair fring'd canopies. Her comely nose, with uniformal grace, Like purest white, stands in the middle place, Parting the pair, as we may well suppose. Each cheek resembling still a damask rose, Which like a garden manifestly show How roses, lilies, and carnations grow, Which sweetly mixed both with white and red, Like rose leaves, white and red, seem mingled. Then nature for a sweet allurement sets Two smelling, swelling, bashful cherrylets, The which with ruby redness being tipp'd, Do speak a virgin, merry, cherry-lipp'd. Over the which a neat, sweet skin is drawn, Which makes them show like roses under lawn: These be the ruby portals, and divine, Which ope themselves to show a holy shrine Whose breath is rich perfume, that to the sense Smells like the burn'd Sabean frankincense: In which the tongue, though but a member small, Stands guarded with a rosy-hilly wall; And her white teeth, which in the gums are set Like pearl and gold, make one rich cabinet. Next doth her chin with dimpled beauty strive For his white, plump, and smooth prerogative; At whose fair top, to please the sight, there grows The fairest image of a blushing rose, Mov'd by the chin, whose motion causeth this, That both her lips do part, do meet, do kiss; Her ears, which like two labyrinths are plac'd Moving a question whether that by them The gem is grac'd, or they grac'd by the gem. But the foundation of the architect Is the swan-staining, fair, rare, stately neck Which with ambitious humbleness stands under, Bearing aloft this rich, round world of wonder. Her breast, a place for beauty's throne most fit, Bears up two globes where love and pleasure sit, Which, headed with two rich, round rubies, show Like wanton rosebuds growing out of snow; And in the milky valley that's between Sits Cupid, kissing of his mother queen, Fingering the paps that feel like sieved silk, And press'd a little they will weep pure milk. Then comes the belly, seated next below, Like a fair mountain in Riphean snow, Where Nature, in a whiteness without spot, Hath in the middle tied a Gordian knot. Now love invites me to survey her thighs, Swelling in likeness like two crystal skies, Which to the knees by Nature fastened on, Derive their ever well 'greed motion. Her legs with two clear calves, like silver tri'd, Kindly swell up with little pretty pride, Leaving a distance for the comely small To beautify the leg and foot withal. Then lowly, yet most lovely stand the feet, Round, short and clear, like pounded spices sweet, And whatsoever thing they tread upon They make it scent like bruised cinnamon. The lovely shoulders now allure the eye To see two tablets of pure ivory From which two arms like branches seem to spread With tender rind and silver coloured, With little hands and fingers long and small To grace a lute, a viol, virginal. In length each finger doth his next excel, Each richly headed with a pearly shell. Thus every part in contrariety Meet in the whole and make a harmony, As divers strings do singly disagree, But form'd by number make sweet melody. Ere I go hence and be no more Seen to the world, I'll give the score I owe unto a female child, And that is this, a verse enstyled My daughter's dowry; having which, I'll leave thee then completely rich. Instead of gold, pearl, rubies, bonds Long forfeit, pawned diamonds Or antique pledges, house or land, I give thee this that shall withstand The blow of ruin and of chance. These hurt not thine inheritance, For 'tis fee simple and no rent Thou fortune ow'st for tenement. However after times will praise, This portion, my prophetic bays, Cannot deliver up to th' rust, Yet I keep peaceful in my dust. As for thy birth and better seeds Those which must grow to virtuous deeds , Thou didst derive from that old stem Love and mercy cherish them , Which like a vestal virgin ply With holy fire lest that it die. Grow up with milder laws to know At what time to say aye or no; Let manners teach thee where to be More comely flowing, where less free. These bring thy husband, like to those Old coins and medals we expose To th' show, but never part with. Next, As in a more conspicuous text, Thy forehead, let therein be sign'd The maiden candour of thy mind; And under it two chaste-born spies To bar out bold adulteries, For through these optics fly the darts Of lust which set on fire our hearts. On either side of these quick ears There must be plac'd, for seasoned fears Which sweeten love, yet ne'er come nigh The plague of wilder jealousy. Then let each cheek of thine entice His soul as to a bed of spice Where he may roll and lose his sense, As in a bed of frankincense. A lip enkindled with that coal With which love chafes and warms the soul, Bring to him next, and in it show Love's cherries from such fires grow And have their harvest, which must stand The gathering of the lip, not hand; Then unto these be it thy care To clothe thy words in gentle air, That smooth as oil, sweet, soft and clean As is the childish bloom of bean, They may fall down and stroke, as the Beams of the sun the peaceful sea. With hands as smooth as mercy's bring Him for his better cherishing, That when thou dost his neck ensnare, Or with thy wrist, or flattering hair, He may, a prisoner, there descry Bondage more loved than liberty. A nature so well formed, so wrought To calm and tempest, let be brought With thee, that should he but incline To roughness, clasp him like a vine, Or like as wool meets steel, give way Unto the passion, not to stay; Wrath, if resisted, over-boils, If not, it dies or else recoils. And lastly, see you bring to him Somewhat peculiar to each limb; And I charge thee to be known By n'other face but by thine own. Let it in love's name be kept sleek, Yet to be found when he shall seek It, and not instead of saint Give up his worth unto the paint; For, trust me, girl, she over-does Who by a double proxy woos. But lest I should forget his bed, Be sure thou bring a maidenhead. That is a margarite, which lost, Thou bring'st unto his bed a frost Or a cold poison, which his blood Benumbs like the forgetful flood. The want of earrings' bravery For public eyes; take only these Ne'er travelled for beyond the seas; They're nobly home-bred, yet have price Beyond the far-fet merchandise: Obedience, wise distrust, peace, shy Distance and sweet urbanity; Safe modesty, lov'd patience, fear Of offending, temperance, dear Constancy, bashfulness and all The virtues less or cardinal, Take with my blessing, and go forth And now if there a man be found That looks for such prepared ground, Let him, but with indifferent skill, So good a soil bestock and till; He may ere long have such a wife Nourish in's breast a tree of life. I have beheld two lovers in a night Hatched o'er with moonshine from their stolen delight When this to that, and that to this, had given Or while that each from other's breath did drink Health to the rose, the violet, or pink , Call'd on the sudden by the jealous mother, Some stricter mistress or suspicious other, Urging divorcement worse than death to these By the soon jingling of some sleepy keys, Part with a hasty kiss; and in that show How stay they would, yet forced they are to go. Even such are we, and in our parting do No otherwise than as those former two Natures like ours, we who have spent our time Both from the morning to the evening chime. Nay, till the bellman of the night had tolled Past noon of night, yet wear the hours not old Nor dulled with iron sleep, but have outworn The fresh and fairest nourish of the morn With flame and rapture; drinking to the odd Number of nine which makes us full with God, And in that mystic frenzy we have hurled, As with a tempest, nature through the world, And in a whirlwind twirl'd her home, aghast At that which in her ecstasy had past; Thus crowned with rosebuds, sack, thou mad'st me fly Like fire-drakes, yet didst me no harm thereby. O thou almighty nature, who didst give True heat wherewith humanity doth live Beyond its stinted circle, giving food, White fame and resurrection to the good; Shoring them up 'bove ruin till the doom, The general April of the world doth come That makes all equal. Many thousands should, Were't not for thee, have crumbled into mould, And with their serecloths rotted, not to show Whether the world such spirits had or no, Whereas by thee those and a million since, Nor fate, nor envy, can their fames convince. Homer, Musus, Ovid, Maro, more Of those godful prophets long before Held their eternal fires, and ours of late Thy mercy helping shall resist strong fate, Nor stoop to the centre, but survive as long As fame or rumour hath or trump or tongue; But unto me be only hoarse, since now Heaven and my soul bear record of my vow I my desires screw from thee, and direct Them and my thoughts to that sublim'd respect And conscience unto priesthood; 'tis not need The scarecrow unto mankind that doth breed Wiser conclusions in me, since I know I've more to bear my charge than way to go, Or had I not, I'd stop the spreading itch Of craving more, so in conceit be rich; But 'tis the God of Nature who intends And shapes my function for more glorious ends. Kiss, so depart, yet stay a while to see The lines of sorrow that lie drawn in me In speech, in picture; no otherwise than when, Judgment and death denounced 'gainst guilty men, Each takes a weeping farewell, racked in mind With joys before and pleasures left behind; Shaking the head, whilst each to each doth mourn, With thought they go whence they must ne'er return. So with like looks, as once the ministrel Cast, leading his Eurydice through hell, I strike thy love, and greedily pursue Thee with mine eyes or in or out of view. So looked the Grecian orator when sent From's native country into banishment, Throwing his eyeballs backward to survey The smoke of his beloved Attica; So Tully looked when from the breasts of Rome The sad soul went, not with his love, but doom, Shooting his eyedarts 'gainst it to surprise It, or to draw the city to his eyes. Such is my parting with thee, and to prove There was not varnish only in my love, But substance, lo! receive this pearly tear Frozen with grief and place it in thine ear. Then part in name of peace, and softly on With numerous feet to hoofy Helicon; And when thou art upon that forked hill Amongst the thrice three sacred virgins, fill A full-brimm'd bowl of fury and of rage, And quaff it to the prophets of our age; When drunk with rapture curse the blind and lame, Base ballad-mongers who usurp thy name And foul thy altar; charm some into frogs, Some to be rats, and others to be hogs; Into the loathsom'st shapes thou canst devise To make fools hate them, only by disguise; Thus with a kiss of warmth and love I part Not so, but that some relic in my heart Shall stand for ever, though I do address Chiefly myself to what I must profess. Know yet, rare soul, when my diviner muse Shall want a handmaid as she oft will use , Be ready, thou for me, to wait upon her, Though as a servant, yet a maid of honour. The crown of duty is our duty: well Doing's the fruit of doing well. Farewell. Fly hence, pale care, no more remember Past sorrows with the fled December, But let each pleasant cheek appear Smooth as the childhood of the year, And sing a carol here. 'Twas brave, 'twas brave, could we command the hand Of youth's swift watch to stand As you have done your day; Then should we not decay. But all we wither, and our light Is spilt in everlasting night, Whenas your sight Shows like the heavens above the moon, Like an eternal noon That sees no setting sun. Keep up those flames, and though you shroud Awhile your forehead in a cloud, Do it like the sun to write In the air a greater text of light; Welcome to all our vows, And since you pay To us this day So long desir'd, See we have fir'd Our holy spikenard, and there's none But brings his stick of cinnamon, His eager eye or smoother smile, And lays it gently on the pile, Which thus enkindled, we invoke Your name amidst the sacred smoke. Come then, great Lord. And see our altar burn With love of your return, And not a man here but consumes His soul to glad you in perfumes. You may vow I'll not forget To pay the debt Which to thy memory stands as due As faith can seal it you; Take then tribute of my tears, So long as I have fears To prompt me I shall ever Languish and look, but thy return see never. Oh then to lessen my despair Print thy lips into the air, So by this Means I may kiss thy kiss Whenas some kind Shall hither waft it, and in lieu My lips shall send a back to you. Go hence away, and in thy parting know 'Tis not my voice but Heaven's that bids thee go; Spring hence thy faith, nor think it ill desert I find in thee that makes me thus to part. But voice of fame, and voice of Heaven have thundered We both were lost, if both of us not sundered. Fold now thine arms, and in thy last look rear One sigh of love, and cool it with a tear. Since part we must, let's kiss; that done, retire With as cold frost as erst we met with fire; With such white vows as fate can ne'er dissever, But truth knit fast; and so, farewell for ever. Apollo sings, his harp resounds: give room, For now behold the golden pomp is come, Thy pomp of plays which thousands come to see With admiration both of them and thee. O volume! worthy, leaf by leaf and cover, To be with juice of cedar wash'd all over; Here words with lines and lines with scenes consent To raise an act to full astonishment; Here melting numbers, words of power to move Young men to swoon and maids to die for love. Love lies a-bleeding here, Evadne , there Swells with brave rage, yet comely everywhere; Here's A mad lover , there that high design Of King and no King , and the rare plot thine. So that whene'er we circumvolve our eyes, Such rich, such fresh, such sweet varieties Ravish our spirits, that entranc'd we see None writes love's passion in the world like thee. Charon, O Charon, draw thy boat to th' shore, And to thy many take in one soul more. Who calls? who calls? One overwhelm'd with ruth; Have pity either on my tears or youth, And take me in who am in deep distress; But first cast off thy wonted churlishness. I will be gentle as that air which yields A breath of balm along the Elysian fields. Speak, what art thou? One once that had a lover, Than which thyself ne'er wafted sweeter over. He was Say what? Ah me, my woes are deep. Prithee relate, while I give ear and weep. He was a Hastings; and that one name has In it all good that is, and ever was. He was my life, my love, my joy, but died Some hours before I should have been his bride. Thus, thus the gods celestial still decree, For human joy contingent misery. The hallowed tapers all prepared were, And Hymen call'd to bless the rites. Stop there. Great are my woes. And great must that grief be That makes grim Charon thus to pity thee. But now come in. More let me yet relate. I cannot stay; more souls for waftage wait And I must hence. Yet let me thus much know, Departing hence, where good and bad souls go? Where, dress'd with garlands, there they walk the ground Whose blessed youth with endless flowers is crown'd. But such as have been drown'd in this wild sea, For those is kept the Gulf of Hecate, Where with their own contagion they are fed, And there do punish and are punished. This known, the rest of thy sad story tell When on the flood that nine times circles hell. We sail along to visit mortals never; But there to live where love shall last for ever. No trust to metals nor to marbles, when These have their fate and wear away as men; Times, titles, trophies may be lost and spent, But virtue rears the eternal monument. What more than these can tombs or tombstones pay? But here's the sunset of a tedious day: These two asleep are: I'll but be undress'd And so to bed: pray wish us all good rest. So soon as each his dangling locks hath crown'd With Rosie Chaplets, Lilies, Pansies red, Soft Saffron Circles to perfume the head; Unto the Prince of Shades, whom once his Pen crown'd with sacred Bays And flatt'ring joy, we'll have to recite their plays, Shakespeare and Beamond , Swans to whom the Spheres Listen while they call back the former year To teach the truth of scenes , and more for thee, There yet remains, brave soul , than thou can'st see, To be of that high Hierarchy where none But brave souls take illumination He knew the cause of every maladye, Were it of hoot or cold, or moyste, or drye, And where engendered and of what humour. Fleres si scires unum tua tempora mensem: Rides, cum non sit forsitan una dies. And though they sweep their hearths no less Than maids were wont to do, Yet who of late for cleanliness Finds sixpence in her shoe? A boat! a boat! haste to the ferry! For we go over to be merry, To laugh and quaff, and drink old sherry. Charon! O Charon! the wafter of all souls to bliss or bane! Who calls the ferryman of Hell? Come near and say who lives in bliss and who in pain. Those that die well eternal bliss shall follow. Those that die ill their own black deeds shall swallow. Shall thy black barge those guilty spirits row That kill themselves for love? Oh, no! oh, no! My cordage cracks when such foul sins draw near, No wind blows fair, nor I my boat can steer. What spirits pass and in Elysium reign? Those harmless souls that love and are beloved again. That soul that lives in love and fain would die to win, Shall he go free? Oh, no! it is too foul a sin. He must not come aboard, I dare not row, Storms of despair my boat will overblow. He that unburied lies wants not his hearse, For unto him a tomb's the universe. Wherewith ye make those merry scenes, Whenas ye choose your King and Queen. I have the pea and must be queen. I the bean, and king. I must command. Have I not blest thee? Then go forth, nor fear Or spice, or fish, or fire, or close-stools here; Every night Thou dost me fright, And keep mine eyes from sleeping, etc. Deep-skilled Geographers, whose art and skill Do traverse all the world, and with their quill Declare the strangeness of each several clime, The nature, situation, and the time Of being inhabited, yet all their art And deep informd skill could not impart In what set climate of this Orb or Isle, The King of Fairies kept, whose honoured style Is here inclosed, with the sincere description Of his abode, his nature, and the region In which he rules: read, and thou shalt find Delightful mirth, fit to content thy mind. May the contents thereof thy palate suit, With its mellifluous and pleasing fruit: For nought can more be sweetened to my mind Than that this Pamphlet thy contentment find; Which if it shall, my labour is sufficed, In being by your liking highly prized. Yours to his power, First a cobweb shirt, more thin Than ever spider since could spin. Changed to the whiteness of the snow, By the stormy winds that blow In the vast and frozen air, No shirt half so fine, so fair; A rich waistcoat they did bring, Made of the Trout-fly's gilded wing: At which his Elveship 'gan to fret The wearing it would make him sweat Even with its weight: he needs would wear A waistcoat made of downy hair New shaven off an Eunuch's chin, That pleased him well, 'twas wondrous thin. The outside of his doublet was Made of the four-leaved, true-loved grass, Changed into so fine a gloss, With the oil of crispy moss: It made a rainbow in the night Which gave a lustre passing light. On every seam there was a lace Drawn by the unctuous snail's slow pace, To which the finest, purest, silver thread Compared, did look like dull pale lead. His breeches of the Fleece was wrought, Which from Colchos Jason brought: Spun into so fine a yarn No mortal wight might it discern, Weaved by Arachne on her loom, Just before she had her doom. A rich Mantle he did wear, Made of tinsel gossamer. Beflowered over with a few Diamond stars of morning dew: Dyed crimson in a maiden's blush, Lined with humble-bees' lost plush. His cap was all of ladies' love, So wondrous light, that it did move If any humming gnat or fly Buzzed the air in passing by, About his neck a wreath of pearl, Dropped from the eyes of some poor girl, Pinched, because she had forgot To leave clean water in the pot. Now they, the Elves, within a trice, Prepared a feast less great than nice, Where you may imagine first, The Elves prepare to quench his thirst, In pure seed pearl of infant dew Brought and sweetened with a blue And pregnant violet; which done, His killing eyes begin to run Quite o'er the table, where he spies The horns of watered butterflies, Of which he eats, but with a little Neat cool allay of cuckoo's spittle. Next this the red-cap worm that's shut Within the concave of a nut. Moles' eyes he tastes, then adders' ears; To these for sauce the slain stags' tears, A bloated earwig, and the pith Of sugared rush he glads him with. Then he takes a little moth, Late fatted in a scarlet cloth, A spinner's ham, the beards of mice, Nits carbonadoed, a device Before unknown; the blood of fleas, Which gave his Elveship's stomach ease. The unctuous dew-laps of a snail, The broke heart of a nightingale O'ercome in music, with the sag And well-bestrutted bee's sweet bag. Conserves of atoms, and the mites, The silk-worm's sperm, and the delights Of all that ever yet hath blest Fairy-land: so ends his feast. Who with thy leaves shall wipe, at need, The place where swelling piles do breed; May every ill that bites or smarts Perplex him in his hinder parts. If thou dislik'st the piece thou light'st on first, Think that of all, that I have writ, the worst: But if thou read'st my book unto the end, And still do'st this and that verse, reprehend; O perverse man! if all disgustful be, The extreme scab take thee, and thine, for me. I dreamt this mortal part of mine Was metamorphos'd to a vine; Which crawling one and every way Enthrall'd my dainty Lucia. Methought, her long small legs and thighs I with my tendrils did surprise; Her belly, buttocks, and her waist By my soft nerv'lets were embrac'd; About her head I writhing hung, } And with rich clusters, hid among } The leaves, her temples I behung: } So that my Lucia seem'd to me Young Bacchus ravish'd by his tree. My curls about her neck did crawl, And arms and hands they did enthrall: So that she could not freely stir, All parts there made one prisoner. But when I crept with leaves to hide Those parts, which maids keep unespy'd, Such fleeting pleasures there I took, That with the fancy I awoke; And found, ah me! this flesh of mine More like a stock than like a vine. Goes the world now, it will with thee go hard: The fattest hogs we grease the more with lard. To him that has, there shall be added more; Who is penurious, he shall still be poor. Blanch swears her husband's lovely; when a scald Has blear'd his eyes: besides, his head is bald Next, his wild ears, like leathern wings full spread, Flutter to fly, and bear away his head. Cuffe comes to church much: but he keeps his bed Those Sundays only whenas briefs are read. This makes Cuffe dull; and troubles him the most, Because he cannot sleep i' th' church free cost. Fone says, those mighty whiskers he does wear Are twigs of birch, and willow, growing there: If so, we'll think too, when he does condemn Boys to the lash, that he does whip with them. He'll slit her nose; but blubb'ring, she replies, Good sir, make no more cuts i' th' outward skin, One slit's enough to let adultry in. Glasco had none, but now some teeth has got; Which though they fur, will neither ache or rot. Six teeth he has, whereof twice two are known Made of a haft that was a mutton bone. Which not for use, but merely for the sight, He wears all day, and draws those teeth at night. To th' board, so hot as none could touch the same: Furze three or four times with his cheeks did blow It seem'd by this time to admit the touch, But none could eat it, 'cause it stunk so much. Gryll eats, but ne'er says grace; to speak the truth, Gryll either keeps his breath to cool his broth, Or else, because Gryll's roast does burn his spit, Gryll will not therefore say a grace for it. Strut, once a foreman of a shop we knew; But turn'd a ladies' usher now, 'tis true: Tell me, has Strut got e're a title more? No; he's but foreman, as he was before. First, Jolly's wife is lame; then next loose-hipp'd: Squint-ey'd, hook-nos'd; and lastly, kidney-lipp'd. Pagget, a schoolboy, got a sword, and then He vow'd destruction both to birch and men: Who would not think this younker fierce to fight? Yet coming home, but somewhat late last night , Untruss, his master bade him; and that word Made him take up his shirt, lay down his sword. Prig now drinks water, who before drank beer; What's now the cause? we know the case is clear; Look in Prig's purse, the chev'ril there tells you Prig money wants, either to buy or brew. Batt he gets children, not for love to rear 'em; But out of hope his wife might die to bear 'em. Much-more provides and hoards up like an ant, Yet Much-more still complains he is in want. Let Much-more justly pay his tithes; then try How both his meal and oil will multiply. Luggs, by the condemnation of the Bench, Was lately whipt for lying with a wench. Thus pains and pleasures turn by turn succeed: He smarts at last who does not first take heed. Gubbs calls his children kitlings: and would bound, Some say, for joy, to see those kitlings drown'd. Money thou ow'st me; prethee fix a day For payment promis'd, though thou never pay: Let it be Dooms-day; nay, take longer scope; Pay when th'art honest; let me have some hope. Of flanks and chines of beef doth Gorrell boast He has at home; but who tastes boil'd or roast? Look in his brine-tub, and you shall find there Two stiff blue pigs'-feet and a sow's cleft ear. Wither'd with years, and bed-rid Mumma lies; Dry-roasted all, but raw yet in her eyes. Bar close as you can, and bolt fast too your door, Yet quickly you'll see by the turn of a pin, Sudds launders bands in piss, and starches them Both with her husband's and her own tough fleam. Guess cuts his shoes, and limping, goes about To have men think he's troubled with the gout; But 'tis no gout, believe it, but hard beer, Whose acrimonious humour bites him here. Crooked you are, but that dislikes not me: So you be straight where virgins straight should be. Groynes, for his fleshly burglary of late, Stood in the holy forum candidate; The word is Roman; but in English known: Penance, and standing so, are both but one. To paint the fiend, Pink would the devil see; And so he may, if he'll be rul'd by me; Let but Pink's face i' th' looking-glass be shown, And Pink may paint the devil's by his own. To cleanse his eyes, Tom Brock makes much ado, But not his mouth, the fouler of the two. A clammy rheum makes loathsome both his eyes: His mouth, worse furr'd with oaths and blasphemies. Y'ave laughed enough, sweet, vary now your text! And laugh no more; or laugh, and lie down next. Shark, when he goes to any public feast, Eats to one's thinking, of all there, the least. What saves the master of the house thereby When if the servants search, they may descry In his wide codpiece, dinner being done, Two napkins cramm'd up, and a silver spoon? Bungy does fast; looks pale; puts sackcloth on; Not out of conscience, or religion: Or that this younker keeps so strict a Lent, Fearing to break the king's commandement: But being poor, and knowing flesh is dear, He keeps not one, but many Lents i' th' year. Sneape has a face so brittle, that it breaks Forth into blushes whensoe'er he speaks. Leech boasts, he has a pill, that can alone With speed give sick men their salvation: 'Tis strange, his father long time has been ill, And credits physic, yet not trusts his pill: And why? he knows he must of cure despair, Who makes the sly physician his heir. You say, you love me! that I thus must prove: It that you lie, then I will swear you love. An old, old widow Greedy needs would wed, Not for affection to her or her bed; But in regard, 'twas often said, this old Woman would bring him more than could be told. He took her; now the jest in this appears, So old she was, that none could tell her years. That was the proverb. Let my mistress be Lazy to others, but be long to me. Curse not the mice, no grist of thine they eat; But curse thy children, they consume thy wheat. Mease brags of pullets which he eats: but Mease Ne'er yet set tooth in stump or rump of these. Paske, though his debt be due upon the day Demands no money by a craving way; For why, says he, all debts and their arrears Have reference to the shoulders, not the ears. Prigg, when he comes to houses, oft doth use, Rather than fail, to steal from thence old shoes: Sound or unsound be they, or rent or whole, Prigg bears away the body and the sole. Moon is a usurer, whose gain, Seldom or never knows a wain, Only Moon's conscience, we confess, That ebbs from pity less and less. Shift now has cast his clothes: got all things new; Save but his hat, and that he cannot mew. If wounds in clothes Cuts calls his rags, 'tis clear His linings are the matter running there. When others gain much by the present cast, The cobblers' getting time is at the last. Doll, she so soon began the wanton trade, She ne'er remembers that she was a maid. Skrew lives by shifts; yet swears by no small oaths For all his shifts he cannot shift his clothes. Linnet plays rarely on the lute, we know; And sweetly sings, but yet his breath says no. Glass, out of deep, and out of desp'rate want, Turn'd from a Papist here a Predicant. A vicarage at last Tom Glass got here, Just upon five and thirty pounds a year. Add to that thirty-five but five pounds more, He'll turn a Papist, ranker than before. Eeles winds and turns, and cheats and steals; yet Eeles Driving these sharking trades, is out at heels. Rasp plays at nine-holes; and 'tis known he gets Many a tester by his game and bets: But of his gettings there's but little sign; When one hole wastes more than he gets by nine. Center is known weak-sighted, and he sells To others store of helpful spectacles. Why wears he none? Because we may suppose, Where leaven wants, there level lies the nose. Skinns, he dined well to-day: how do you think? His nails they were his meat, his rheum the drink. Pievish doth boast that he's the very first Of English poets, and 'tis thought the worst. Jolly and Jilly bite and scratch all day, But yet get children as the neighbours say . The reason is: though all the day they fight, They cling and close some minutes of the night. Now Patrick with his footmanship has done, His eyes and ears strive which should fastest run. Of four teeth only Bridget was possest; Two she spat out, a cough forced out the rest. Why walks Nick Flimsey like a malcontent! Is it because his money all is spent? No, but because the dingthrift now is poor, And knows not where i' th' world to borrow more. Last night thou didst invite me home to eat; And showed me there much plate, but little meat. Prithee, when next thou do'st invite, bar state, And give me meat, or give me else thy plate. Roots had no money; yet he went o' the score, For a wrought purse; can any tell wherefore? Say, what should Roots do with a purse in print, That had not gold nor silver to put in't? Craw cracks in sirrop; and does stinking say, Who can hold that, my friends, that will away? Who to the north, or south, doth set His bed, male children shall beget. Of all that nature doth intend. Were there not a matter known, There would be no passion. Since Jack and Jill both wicked be; It seems a wonder unto me, That they, no better do agree. Old Parson Beanes hunts six days of the week, And on the seventh, he has his notes to seek. Six days he hollows so much breath away, That on the seventh, he can nor preach or pray. This lady's short, that mistress she is tall; But long or short, I'm well content with all. Rook he sells feathers, yet he still doth cry Fie on this pride, this female vanity. Thus, though the Rook does rail against the sin, He loves the gain that vanity brings in. Spunge makes his boasts that he's the only man Can hold of beer and ale an ocean; Is this his glory? then his triumph's poor; I know the tun of Heidleberg holds more. You say you're young; but when your teeth are told To be but three, black-ey'd, we'll think you old. Huncks has no money, he does swear or say, About him, when the tavern's shot's to pay. If he has none in 's pockets, trust me, Huncks Has none at home in coffers, desks, or trunks. Feacie, some say, doth wash her clothes i' th' lie That sharply trickles from her either eye. The laundresses, they envy her good-luck, Who can with so small charges drive the buck. What needs she fire and ashes to consume, Who can scour linens with her own salt rheum? Skurf by his nine-bones swears, and well he may: All know a fellon eat the tenth away. When Jill complains to Jack for want of meat, Jack kisses Jill and bids her freely eat: Jill says, Of what? says Jack, On that sweet kiss, Which full of nectar and ambrosia is, The food of poets. So I thought, says Jill, That makes them look so lank, so ghost-like still. Let poets feed on air, or what they will; Let me feed full, till that I fart, says Jill. Parrat protests 'tis he, and only he Can teach a man the art of memory: Believe him not; for he forgot it quite, Being drunk, who 'twas that can'd his ribs last night. Kissing and bussing differ both in this; We buss our wantons, but our wives we kiss. Maggot frequents those houses of good-cheer, Talks most, eats most, of all the feeders there. He raves through lean, he rages through the fat, What gets the master of the meal by that? He who with talking can devour so much, How would he eat, were not his hindrance such? Joan would go tell her hairs; and well she might, Having but seven in all: three black, four white. Letcher was carted first about the streets, For false position in his neighbour's sheets: Next, hanged for thieving: now the people say, His carting was the prologue to this play. Dundrige his issue hath; but is not styl'd, For all his issue, father of one child. Once on a Lord Mayor's Day, in Cheapside, when Skulls could not well pass through that scum of men, For quick despatch Skulls made no longer stay Than but to breathe, and everyone gave way; For, as he breathed, the people swore from thence A fart flew out, or a sir-reverence. Broomsted a lameness got by cold and beer: And to the bath went, to be cured there: His feet were helped, and left his crutch behind; But home returned, as he went forth, half blind. With paste of almonds, Syb her hands doth scour; Then gives it to the children to devour. In cream she bathes her thighs, more soft than silk; Then to the poor she freely gives the milk. The eggs of pheasants wry-nosed Tooly sells, But ne'er so much as licks the speckled shells: Only, if one prove addled, that he eats With superstition, as the cream of meats. The cock and hen he feeds; but not a bone He ever picked, as yet, of anyone. I have seen many maidens to have hair, Both for their comely need and some to spare; But Blanch has not so much upon her head As to bind up her chaps when she is dead. Umber was painting of a lion fierce, And, working it, by chance from Umber's erse Flew out a crack, so mighty, that the fart, As Umber states, did make his lion start. Urles had the gout so, that he could not stand; Then from his feet it shifted to his hand: When 'twas in's feet, his charity was small; Now 'tis in's hand, he gives no alms at all. Franck ne'er wore silk she swears; but I reply, She now wears silk to hide her blood-shot eye. You say you'll kiss me, and I thank you for it; But stinking breath, I do as hell abhor it. What is the reason Coone so dully smells? His nose is over-cool'd with icicles. Of pushes Spalt has such a knotty race, He needs a tucker for to burl his face. Horne sells to others teeth; but has not one To grace his own gums, or of box, or bone. Fie, quoth my lady, what a stink is here? When 'twas her breath that was the carrionere. Cock calls his wife his Hen: when Cock goes to't, Cock treads his Hen, but treads her underfoot. What made that mirth last night? the neighbours say, That Bran the baker did his breech beray: I rather think, though they may speak the worst, 'Twas to his batch, but leaven laid there first. Snare, ten i' th' hundred calls his wife; and why? She brings in much by carnal usury. He by extortion brings in three times more: Grudgings turns bread to stones, when to the poor He gives an alms, and chides them from his door. Since Gander did his pretty youngling wed, Gander, they say, doth each night piss a-bed: What is the cause? Why, Gander will reply, No goose lays good eggs that is trodden dry. Lungs, as some say, ne'er sets him down to eat But that his breath does fly-blow all the meat. Cob clouts his shoes, and, as the story tells, His thumb nails par'd afford him sparrables. Skoles stinks so deadly, that his breeches loath His dampish buttocks furthermore to clothe; Cloy'd they are up with arse; but hope, one blast Will whirl about, and blow them thence at last. Jone is a wench that's painted; Jone is a girl that's tainted; Yet Jone she goes Like one of those Whom purity had sainted. Jane is a girl that's pretty; Jane is a wench that's witty; Yet who would think, Her breath does stink, As so it doth? that's pity. Is Zelot pure? he is: yet! see he wears The sign of circumcision in his ears. For ropes of pearl, first Madam Ursly shows A chain of corns picked from her ears and toes; Then, next, to match Tradescant's curious shells, Nails from her fingers mew'd she shows: what else? Why then, forsooth, a carcanet is shown Of teeth, as deaf as nuts, and all her own. Trigg having turn'd his suit, he struts in state, And tells the world he's now regenerate. How could Luke Smeaton wear a shoe, or boot, Who two-and-thirty corns had on a foot. To loose the button is no less, Than to cast off all bashfulness. Franck would go scour her teeth; and setting to 't Twice two fell out, all rotten at the root. Paul's hands do give; what give they, bread or meat, Or money? no, but only dew and sweat. As stones and salt gloves use to give, even so Paul's hands do give, nought else for ought we know. Sibb, when she saw her face how hard it was, For anger spat on thee, her looking-glass: But weep not, crystal; for the same was meant Not unto thee, but that thou didst present. Slouch he packs up, and goes to several fairs, And weekly markets for to sell his wares: Meantime that he from place to place does roam, His wife her own ware sells as fast at home. Bice laughs, when no man speaks; and doth protest. It is his own breech there that breaks the jest. Tom shifts the trenchers; yet he never can Endure that lukewarm name of serving-man: Serve or not serve, let Tom do what he can, He is a serving, who's a trencher-man. Comely acts well; and when he speaks his part, He doth it with the sweetest tones of art: But when he sings a psalm, there's none can be More curs'd for singing out of tune than he. E'en all religious courses to be rich Hath been rehers'd by Joel Michelditch: But now perceiving that it still does please The sterner fates, to cross his purposes; He tacks about, and now he doth profess Rich he will be by all unrighteousness; Thus if our ship fails of her anchor hold We'll love the divel, so he lands the gold. Old Widow Prouse, to do her neighbours evil, Would give, some say, her soul unto the devil. Well, when she's kill'd that pig, goose, cock, or hen, What would she give to get that soul again? Thou writes in prose how sweet all virgins be; But there's not one, doth praise the smell of thee. Seal'd up with night-gum, Loach each morning lies, Till his wife licking, so unglues his eyes. No question then, but such a lick is sweet, When a warm tongue does with such ambers meet. Wherever Nodes does in the summer come, He prays his harvest may be well brought home. What store of corn has careful Nodes, think you, Whose field his foot is, and whose barn his shoe? Tap, better known than trusted, as we hear, Sold his old mother's spectacles for beer: And not unlikely; rather too than fail, He'll sell her eyes, and nose, for beer and ale. Give me a reason why men call Punchin a dry plant-animal. Because as plants by water grow, Punchin by beer and ale spreads so. Tom Blinks his nose is full of weals, and these Tom calls not pimples, but pimpleides; Sometimes, in mirth, he says each whelk's a spark, When drunk with beer, to light him home i' th' dark. Peapes he does strut, and pick his teeth, as if His jaws had tir'd on some large chine of beef. But nothing so: the dinner Adam had, Was cheese full ripe with tears, with bread as sad. Hanch, since he lately did inter his wife, He weeps and sighs, as weary of his life. Say, is't for real grief he mourns? not so; Tears have their springs from joy, as well as woe. Long locks of late our zealot Peason wears, Not for to hide his high and mighty ears; No, but because he would not have it seen That stubble stands where once large ears have been. I abhor the slimy kiss, Which to me most loathsome is. Those lips please me which are placed Close, but not too strictly laced: Yielding I would have them; yet Not a wimbling tongue admit: What should poking-sticks make there, When the ruffe is set elswhere? Reape's eyes so raw are that, it seems, the flies Mistake the flesh, and fly-blow both his eyes; So that an angler, for a day's expense, May bait his hook with maggots taken thence. Teage has told lies so long that when Teage tells Truth, yet Teage's truths are untruths, nothing else. Truggin a footman was; but now, grown lame, Truggin now lives but to belie his name. Spenke has a strong breath, yet short prayers saith; Not out of want of breath, but want of faith. Lulls swears he is all heart; but you'll suppose By his proboscis that he is all nose. Bad are all surfeits; but physicians call That surfeit took by bread the worst of all. Nis he makes verses; but the lines he writes Serve but for matter to make paper kites. Prickles is waspish, and puts forth his sting For bread, drink, butter, cheese; for everything That Prickles buys puts Prickles out of frame; How well his nature's fitted to his name! Blisse, last night drunk, did kiss his mother's knee; Where will he kiss, next drunk, conjecture ye. Burr is a smell-feast, and a man alone, That, where meat is, will be a hanger on. Meg yesterday was troubled with a pose, Which, this night harden'd, sodders up her nose. Ralph pares his nails, his warts, his corns, and Ralph In sev'rall tills and boxes, keeps 'em safe; Instead of hartshorn, if he speaks the troth, To make a lusty-jelly for his broth. Vinegar is no other, I define, Than the dead corps, or carcase of the wine. Mudge every morning to the postern comes, His teeth all out, to rinse and wash his gums. Lupes for the outside of his suit has paid; But for his heart, he cannot have it made; The reason is, his credit cannot get The inward garbage for his clothes as yet. What are our patches, tatters, rags, and rents, But the base dregs and lees of vestiments? For thirty years Tubbs has been proud and poor; 'Tis now his habit, which he can't give o'er. Spokes, when he sees a roasted pig, he swears Nothing he loves on't but the chaps and ears: But carve to him the fat flanks, and he shall Rid these, and those, and part by part eat all. We read how Faunus, he the shepherds' god, His wife to death whipped with a myrtle rod. The rod, perhaps, was better'd by the name; But had it been of birch, the death's the same. Up with the quintell, that the rout, May fart for joy, as well as shout: Either's welcome, stink or civit, If we take it, as they give it. Brown bread Tom Penny eats, and must of right, Because his stock will not hold out for white. Buggins is drunk all night, all day he sleeps; This is the level-coil that Buggins keeps. Boreman takes toll, cheats, natters, lies; yet Boreman, For all the devil helps, will be a poor man. Unto Pastillus rank Gorgonius came To have a tooth twitched out of's native frame; Drawn was his tooth, but stank so, that some say, The barber stopped his nose, and ran away. Grubs loves his wife and children, while that they Can live by love, or else grow fat by play; But when they call or cry on Grubs for meat, Instead of bread Grubs gives them stones to eat. He raves, he rends, and while he thus doth tear, His wife and children fast to death for fear. No question but Doll's cheeks would soon roast dry, Were they not basted by her either eye. Hog has a place i' the' kitchen, and his share, The flimsy livers and blue gizzards are. Science puffs up, says Gut, when either pease Make him thus swell, or windy cabbages. Spur jingles now, and swears by no mean oaths, He's double honour'd, since he's got gay clothes: Most like his suit, and all commend the trim; And thus they praise the sumpter, but not him: As to the goddess, people did confer Worship, and not to th' ass that carried her. Rump is a turn-broach, yet he seldom can Steal a swoln sop out of a dripping-pan. Old Widow Shopter, whensoe'er she cries, Lets drip a certain gravy from her eyes. If felt and heard, unseen, thou dost me please; If seen, thou lik'st me, Deb, in none of these. One silver spoon shines in the house of Croot; Who cannot buy or steal a second to't. Flood, if he has for him and his a bit, He says his fore and after grace for it: If meat he wants, then grace he says to see His hungry belly borne on legs jail-free. Thus have, or have not, all alike is good To this our poor yet ever patient Flood. When Pimp's feet sweat, as they do often use, There springs a soap-like lather in his shoes. In Den'shire Kersey Lusk, when he was dead, Would shrouded be and therewith buried. When his assigns asked him the reason why, He said, because he got his wealth thereby. In's Tusc'lans, Tully doth confess, No plague there's like to foolishness. Rush saves his shoes in wet and snowy weather; And fears in summer to wear out the leather; This is strong thrift that wary Rush doth use Summer and winter still to save his shoes. The staff is now greas'd; And very well pleas'd, She cocks out her arse at the parting, To an old ram goat That rattles i' th' throat, Half-choked with the stink of her farting. In a dirty hair-lace She leads on a brace Of black boar-cats to attend her: Who scratch at the moon, And threaten at noon Of night from heaven for to rend her. A-hunting she goes, A cracked horn she blows, At which the hounds fall a-bounding; While th' moon in her sphere Peeps trembling for fear, And night's afraid of the sounding. Semper pauper eris, si pauper es, Aemiliane. <|endofpoem|> Dantur opes nulli nunc nisi divitibus. Cp. also Davison's Poet. Rhap., i. . Ed. Bullen. In which the veins implanted seem to lie Like loving vines hid under ivory, So full of claret, that whoso pricks this vine May see it spout forth streams like muscadine. Twelve lines later, after Riphean snow, comes a longer passage: Or else that she in that white waxen hill Hath seal'd the primrose of her utmost skill. But now my muse hath spied a dark descent From this so precious, pearly, permanent, A milky highway that direction yields Unto the port-mouth of the Elysian fields: A place desired of all, but got by these Whom love admits to the Hesperides; Here's golden fruit, that doth exceed all price, Growing in this love-guarded paradise; Above the entrance there is written this: This is the portal to the bower of bliss, Through midst whereof a crystal stream there flows Passing the sweet sweet of a musky rose. With plump, soft flesh, of metal pure and fine, Resembling shields, both pure and crystalline. Hence rise those two ambitious hills that look Into th' middle, sweet, sight-stealing crook, Which for the better beautifying shrouds Its humble self 'twixt two aspiring clouds Richer than that fair, precious, virtuous horn That arms the forehead of the unicorn. The last four lines are joined on at the end of all: Unto the idol of the work divine I consecrate this loving life of mine, Bowing my lips unto that stately root Where beauty springs; and thus I kiss her foot. His rimes were smooth, his meeters well did close, But yet his maner better fitted prose. The little bird yet to salute the morn Upon the naked branches sets her foot, The leaves then lying on the mossy root, And there a silly chirruping doth keep, As if she fain would sing, yet fain would weep; Praising fair summer that too soon is gone, Or sad for winter too soon coming on. Had Henryes name beene onely met in Prose, Recorded by the humble wit of those, Who write of lesse then Kings: who victory, As calmely mention, as a Pedigree, The French, alike with vs, might view his name His actions too, and not confesse a shame: Nay, grow at length, so boldly troublesome, As, to dispute if they were ouercome. But thou hast wakte their feares: thy fiercer hand Hath made their shame as lasting, as their land. By thee againe they are compeld to knowe How much of Fate is in an English foe. They bleede afresh by thee, and thinke the harme Such; they could rather wish, twere Henryes arme: Who thankes thy painfull quill; and holds it more To be thy Subiect now, then King before. By thee he conquers yet; when eury word Yeelds him a fuller honour, then his sword. Strengthens his action against time: by thee, Hee victory, and France, doth hold in fee. So well obserud he is, that eury thing Speakes him not onely English, but a King. And France, in this, may boast her fortunate That shee was worthy of so braue a hate. Her suffring is her gayne. How well we see The Battaile labourd worthy him, and thee, Where, wee may Death discouer with delight, And entertaine a pleasure from a fight. Where wee may see how well it doth become The braury of a Prince to ouercome. What Power is a Poet: that can add A life to Kings, more glorious, then they had. For what of Henry, is vnsung by thee, Henry doth want of his Eternity. What lofty Trophyes of eternall Fame, England may vaunt thou dost erect to her, Yet forced to confesse, yea blush for shame, That she no Honour doth on thee confer. How it would become her, would she learne to knowe Once to requite thy Heauen-borne Art and Zeale, Or at the least her selfe but thankfull showe Her ancient Glories that dost still reueale: Sing thou of Loue, thy straines like powerfull Charmes Enrage the bosome with an amorous fire, And when againe thou likst to sing of Armes The Coward thou with Courage dost inspire: But when thou comst to touch our Sinfull Times, Then Heauen far more then Earth speakes in thy Rimes. It hath beene questiond, Michael, if I bee A Friend at all; or, if at all, to thee: Because, who make the question, haue not seene Those ambling visits, passe in verse, betweene Thy Muse, and mine, as they expect. Tis true: You haue not writ to me, nor I to you; And, though I now begin, tis not to rub Hanch against Hanch, or raise a riming Club About the towne: this reckning I will pay, Without conferring symboles. This s my day. It was no Dreame! I was awake, and saw! Lend me thy voyce, O Fame, that I may draw Wonder to truth! and haue my Vision hoorld, Hot from thy trumpet, round, about the world. I saw a Beauty from the Sea to rise, That all Earth lookd on; and that earth, all Eyes! It cast a beame as when the chear-full Sun Is fayre got vp, and day some houres begun! And filld an Orbe as circular, as heauen! The Orbe was cut forth into Regions seauen. And those so sweet, and well proportiond parts, As it had beene the circle of the Arts! When, by thy bright Ideas standing by, I found it pure, and perfect Poesy, There read I, streight, thy learned Legends three, Heard the soft ayres, between our Swaynes & thee, Which made me thinke, the old Theocritus, Or Rurall Virgil come, to pipe to vs! But then, thyepistolar Heroick Songs, Their loues, their quarrels, iealousies, and wrongs Did all so strike me, as I cryd, who can With vs be calld, the Naso, but this man? And looking vp, I saw Mineruas fowle, Pearchd ouer head, the wise Athenian Owle: I thought thee then our Orpheus, that wouldst try Like him, to make the ayre, one volary: And I had stild thee, Orpheus, but before My lippes could forme the voyce, I heard that Rore, And Rouze, the Marching of a mighty force, Drums against Drums, the neighing of the Horse, The Fights, the Cryes, and wondring at the Iarres I saw, and read, it was thy Barons Warres! O, how in those, dost thou instruct these times, That Rebells actions, are but valiant crimes! And caried, though with shoute, and noyse, confesse A wild, and an authorizd wickednesse! Sayst thou so, Lucan? But thou scornst to stay Vnder one title. Thou hast made thy way And flight about the Ile, well neare, by this, In thy admired Perigesis, Or vniuersall circumduction Of all that reade thy Poly-Olbyon. That reade it? that are rauishd! such was I With euery song, I sweare, and so would dye: But that I heare, againe, thy Drum to beate A better cause, and strike the brauest heate That euer yet did fire the English blood! Our right in France! if ritely vnderstood. There, thou art Homer! Pray thee vse the stile Thou hast deserud: And let me reade the while Thy Catalogue of Ships, exceeding his, Thy list of aydes, and force, for so it is: The Poets act! and for his Countrys sake Braue are the Musters, that the Muse will make. And when he ships them where to vse their Armes, How do his trumpets breath! What loud alarmes! Looke, how we read the Spartans were inflamd With bold Tyrtus verse, when thou art namd, So shall our English Youth vrge on, and cry An Agincourt, an Agincourt, or dye. This booke! it is a Catechisme to fight, And will be bought of euery Lord, and Knight, That can but reade; who cannot, may in prose Get broken peeces, and fight well by those. The miseries of Margaret the Queene Of tender eyes will more be wept, then seene: I feele it by mine owne, that ouer flow, And stop my sight, in euery line I goe. But then refreshed, with thy Fayerie Court, I looke on Cynthia, and Sirenas sport, As, on two flowry Carpets, that did rise, And with their grassie greene restord mine eyes. Yet giue mee leaue, to wonder at the birth Of thy strange Moon-Calfe, both thy straine of mirth, And Gossip-got acquaintance, as, to vs Thou hadst brought Lapland, or old Cobalus, Empusa, Lamia, or some Monster, more Then Affricke knew, or the full Grecian shore! I gratulate it to thee, and thy Ends, To all thy vertuous, and well chosen Friends, Onely my losse is, that I am not there: And, till I worthy am to wish I were, I call the world, that enuies mee, to see If I can be a Friend, and Friend to thee. Ceasd was the Thunder, of those Drummes which wakd Thaffrighted French their miseries to view, At Edwards name, which to that houre still quakd, Their Salique Tables to the ground that threw, Yet were the English courages not slakd, But the same Bowes, and the same Blades they drew, With the same Armes, those weapons to aduance, Which lately lopt the Flower de liz of France. Henry the fift, that man made out of fire, ThImperiall Wreath placd on his Princely browe; His Lyons courage stands not to enquire Which way olde Henry came by it; or howe At Pomfret Castell Richard should expire: Whats that to him? He hath the Garland now; Let Bullingbrook beware how he it wan, For Munmouth meanes to keepe it, if he can. That glorious day, which his great Father got, Vpon the Percyes; calling to their ayde The valiant Dowglass, that Herculian Scot, When for his Crowne at Shrewsbury they playde, Had quite dishartned eury other plot, And all those Tempests quietly had layde, That not a cloud did to this Prince appeare, No former King had seene a skye so cleere. Yet the rich Clergy felt a fearefull Rent, In the full Bosome of their Church whilst she A Monarchesse, immeasurably spent, Lesse then she was, and thought she might not be: By Wickclif and his followers; to preuent The growth of whose opinions, and to free That foule Aspersion, which on her they layde, She her strongst witts must stirre vp to her ayde. When presently a Parliament is calld To sett things steddy, that stood not so right, But that thereby the poore might be inthrald, Should they be vrged by those that were of might, That in his Empire, equitie enstauld, It should continue in that perfect plight; Wherefore to Lester, he thAssembly drawes, There to Inact those necessary Lawes. In which one Bill mongst many there was red, Against the generall, and superfluous waste Of temporall Lands, the Laity that had fed Vpon the Houses of Religion caste, Which for defence might stand the Realme in sted, Where it most needed were it rightly plact; Which made those Church-men generally to feare, For all this calme, some tempest might be neare. And being right skilfull, quickly they forsawe, No shallow braines this busnesse went about: Therefore with cunning they must cure this flawe; For of the King they greatly stood in doubt, Lest him to them, their opposites should drawe, Some thing must be thrust in, to thrust that out: And to this end they wisely must prouide One, this great Engine, Clearkly that could guide. Chichley, that sate on Canterburies See, A man well spoken, grauely stout, and wise, The most select, then thought of that could be, To act what all the Prelacie diuise; For well they knew, that in this busnesse, he Would to the vtmost straine his faculties; Him lift they vp, with their maine strength, to proue By some cleane slight this Lybell to remoue. His braine in labour, gladly foorth would bring Somewhat, that at this needfull time might fit, The sprightly humor of this youthfull King, If his inuention could but light of it; His working soule proiecteth many a thing, Vntill at length out of the strength of wit, He found a warre with France, must be the way To dash this Bill, else threatning their decay. Whilst vacant mindes sate in their breasts at ease, And the remembrance of their Conquests past, Vpon their fansies doth so strongly sease, As in their teeth, their Cowardise it cast Rehearsing to them those victorious daies, The deeds of which, beyond their names should last, That after ages, reading what was theirs, Shall hardly thinke, those men had any Heires. And to this point, premeditating well, A speech, which chancd, the very pinne to cleaue Aymd, whatsoeuer the successe befell That it no roomth should for a second leaue, More of this Title then in hand to tell, If so his skill him did not much deceaue, And gainst the King in publike should appeare; Thus frames his speech to the Assembly there. Pardon my boldnesse, my Liedge Soueraine Lord, Nor your Dread presence let my speech offend, Your milde attention, fauourably affoord, Which, such cleere vigour to my spirit shall lend, That it shall set an edge vpon your Sword, To my demand, and make you to attend, Asking you, why, men traind to Armes you keepe, Your right in France yet suffering still to sleepe. Can such a Prince be in an Iland pent, And poorely thus shutt vp within a Sea. When as your right includes that large extent, To theither Alpes your Empire forth to lay, Can he be English borne, and is not bent To follow you, appoint you but the way, Weele wade if we want ships, the waues or climme, In one hand hold our swords, with thother swim. What time controules, your braue great Grandsires claim, To thRealme of France, from Philip namd the faire, Which to King Edward by his mother came, Queene Isabel; that Philips onely heire, Which this short intermission doth not maime, But if it did, as he, so yours repaire; That where his Right in bloud preuailed not, In spight of hell, yet by his Sword he got. What set that Conqueror, by their Salique Lawes, Those poore decrees their Parliaments could make, He entred on the iustnesse of his Cause, To make good, what he dard to vndertake, And once in Action, he stood not to pause, But in vpon them like a Tempest brake, And downe their buildings with such fury bare, That they from mists dissolued were to ayre. As those braue Edwards, Father, and the Sonne, At Conquerd Cressy, with successefull lucke, Where first all France as at one game they wonne, Neuer two Warriours, such a Battaile strucke, That when the bloudy dismall fight was done, Here in one heape, there in another Rucke Princes and Peasants lay together mixt, The English Swords, no difference knew betwixt. There Lewes King of Beame was ouerthrowne With valient Charles, of France the younger Brother, A Daulphine, and two Dukes, in pieces hewen; To them six Earles lay slaine by one another; There the grand Prior of France, fetcht his last groane, Two Archbishops the boystrous Croud doth smother, There fifteene thousand of their Gentrie dyde With each two Souldiers, slaughtered by his side. Nor the Blacke Prince, at Poyteers battaile fought; Short of his Father, and himselfe before, Her King and Prince, that prisoners hither brought From forty thousand weltring in their gore, That in the Worlds opinion it was thought, France from that instant could subsist no more, The Marshall, and the Constable, there slaine Vnder the Standard, in that Battaile tane. Nor is this clayme for women to succeede, Gainst which they would your right to France debarre A thing so new, that it so much should neede Such opposition, as though fetcht from farre, By Pepin this is proud, as by a deede, Deposing Cheldrick, by a fatall warre, By Blythild dard his title to aduance, Daughter to Clothar, first so namd of France. Hugh Capet, who from Charles of Lorayne tooke The Crowne of France, that he in peace might raigne, As heire to Lingard to her title stooke, Who was the daughter of King Charlemaine, So holy Lewes poring on his booke, Whom that Hugh Capet made his heire againe, From Ermingard his Grandame, claimd the Crowne, Duke Charles his daughter, wrongfully put downe. Nor thinke my Leege a fitter time then this, You could haue found your Title to aduance, At the full height when now the faction is, Twixt Burgoyne, and the house of Orleance, Your purpose you not possibly can misse, It for my Lord so luckily doth chance, That whilst these two in opposition stand, You may haue time, your Army there to land. And if my fancy doe not ouerpresse, My visuall sence, me thinkes in euery eye I see such cheere, as of our good successe In France hereafter seemes to Prophecie; Thinke not my Soueraigne, my Alegeance lesse Quoth he; my Lords nor doe you misaply My words: thus long vpon this subiect spent, Who humbly here submit to your assent. This speech of his, that powerfull Engine proud, Then er our Fathers got, which raisd vs hier, The Clergies feare that quietly remoud, And into France transferd our Hostile fier, It made the English through the world beloud, That durst to those so mighty things aspire, And gaue so cleere a luster to our fame, That neighbouring Nations trembled at our name. When through the house, this rumor scarcely ran, That warre with France propounded was againe, In all thAssembly there was not a man, But put the proiect on with might and maine, So great applause it generally wan, That else no busnesse they would entertaine, As though their honour vtterly were lost, If this designe should any way be crost. So much mens mindes, now vpon France were set That euery one doth with himselfe forecast, What might fall out this enterprize to let, As what againe might giue it wings of hast, And for they knew, the French did still abet The Scot against vs, which we vsde to tast It questiond was if it were fit or no, To Conquer them, ere we to France should goe. Which Ralph then Earle of Westmorland proposd, Quoth he, with Scotland let vs first begin, By which we are vpon the North inclosd, And lockt with vs, one Continent within, Then first let Scotland be by vs disposd, And with more ease, yee spatious France may winne, Else of our selues, ere we our Ships can cleere, To land in France; they will inuade vs here. Not so braue Neuill, Excester replies, For that of one two labours were to make, For Scotland wholly vpon France relies; First, Conquer France, and Scotland yee may take, Tis the French pay, the Scot to them that tyes, That stopt, asunder quickly yee shall shake The French and Scots; to France then first say I, First, first, to France, then all the Commons cry. And instantly an Embassy is sent, To Charles of France, to will him to restore Those Territories, of whose large extent, The English Kings were owners of before; Which if he did not, and incontinent, The King would set those English on his Shore, That in despight of him, and all his might, Should leaue their liues there, or redeeme his right. First Normandy, in his demand he makes, With Aquitane, a Dutchy no lesse great, Aniou, and Mayne, with Gascoyne which he takes Cleerely his owne, as any English seat; With these proud France, he first of all awakes, For their deliuery, giuing power to treat; For well he knew, if Charles should these restore, No King of France was euer left so poore. The King, and Daulphin, to his proud demand, That he might see they no such matter ment, As a thing fitter for his youthfull hand; A Tunne of Paris Tennis balls him sent, Better himselfe to make him vnderstand, Deriding his ridiculous intent: And that was all the answere he could get, Which more, the King doth to this Conquest whet. That answering the Ambassadour, quoth he, Thanks for my Balls, to Charles your Soueraigne giue, And thus assure him, and his sonne from me, Ile send him Balls and Rackets if I liue, That they such Racket shall in Paris see, When ouer lyne with Bandies I shall driue, As that before the Set be fully done, France may perhaps into the Hazard runne. So little doth luxurious France fore-see By her disdaine, what shee vpon her drew: In her most brauery seeming then to be, The punishment that shortly should ensue, Which so incenst the English King, that he For full reuenge into that fury grew: That those three horrors, Famine, Sword, and Fire, Could not suffice to satisfie his ire. In all mens mouthes now was no word but warre, As though no thing had any other name; And folke would aske of them ariud from farre, What forces were preparing whence they came? Gainst any busnesse twas a lawfull barre To say for France they were; and twas a shame For any man to take in hand to doe Ought, but some thing that did belong thereto. Olde Armours are drest vp, and new are made; Iacks are in working, and strong shirts of Male, He scowers an olde Fox, he a Bilbowe blade, Now Shields and Targets onely are for sale; Who works for warre, now thriueth by his Trade, The browne Bill, and the Battell-Axe preuaile: The curious Fletcher fits his well-strung Bowe, And his barbd Arrow which he sets to showe. Tents and Pauillions in the fields are pitcht, Er full wrought vp their Roomthynesse to try Windowes, and Towers, with Ensignes are inricht, With ruffling Banners, that doe braue the sky, Wherewith the wearied Labourer bewitcht To see them thus hang wauing in his eye: His toylsome burthen from his back doth throwe, And bids them worke that will, to France heell goe. Rich Saddles for the Light-horse and the Bard For to be braust theres not a man but plyes, Plumes, Bandroules, and Caparizons prepard; Whether of two, and men at Armes diuise The Greaues, or Guyses were the surer guard, The Vambrasse, or the Pouldron, they should prize; And where a stand of Pykes plact close, or large, Which way to take aduantage in the Charge. One traynes his Horse, another trayles his Pyke, He with his Pole-Axe, practiseth the fight, The Bowe-man which no Country hath the like With his sheafe Arrow, proueth by his might, How many score off, he his Foe can strike, Yet not to draw aboue his bosomes hight: The Trumpets sound the Charge and the Retreat, The bellowing Drumme, the Martch againe doth beat. Cannons vpon their Caridge mounted are, Whose Battery France must feele vpon her Walls, The Engineer prouiding the Petar, To breake the strong Percullice, and the Balls, Of Wild-fire deuisd to throw from farre, To burne to ground their Pallaces and Halls: Some studying are, the scale which they had got, Thereby to take the Leuell of their Shot. The man in yeares preacht to his youthfull sonne Prest to this Warre, as they sate by the fire, What deedes in France were by his Father done, To this attempt to worke him to aspire, And told him, there how he an Ensigne wonne, Which many a yeare was hung vp in the Quire: And in the Battell, where he made his way, How many French men he struck downe that day. The good old man, with teares of ioy would tell, In Cressy field what prizes Edward playd, As what at Poycteers the Black Prince befell, How like a Lyon, he about him layd: In deedes of Armes how Awdley did excell, For their olde sinnes, how they the French men payd: How brauely Basset did behaue him there: How Oxford chargd the Van, Warwick the Reare. And Boy, quoth he, I haue heard thy Grandsire say, That once he did an English Archer see, Who shooting at a French twelue score away, Quite through the body, stuck him to a Tree; Vpon their strengths a King his Crowne might lay: Such were the men of that braue age, quoth he, When with his Axe he at his Foe let driue, Murriain and scalpe downe to the teeth did riue. The scarlet Iudge might now set vp his Mule, With neighing Steeds the Streetes so pestred are; For where he wont in Westminster to rule, On his Tribunal sate the man of Warre, The Lawyer to his Chamber doth recule, For be hath now no busnesse at the Barre: But to make Wills and Testaments for those That were for France, their substance to dispose. By this, the Counsell of this Warre had met, And had at large of eury thing discust; And the graue Clergie had with them beene set: To warrant what they vndertook was iust, And as for monies that to be no let, They bad the King for that to them to trust: The Church to pawne, would see her Challice layde, Er shee would leaue one Pyoner vnpayde. From Milford Hauen, to the mouth of Tweed, Ships of all burthen to Southampton brought, For there the King the Rendeuous decreed To beare aboard his most victorious fraught: The place from whence he with the greatest speed Might land in France, of any that was thought And with successe vpon that lucky shore, Where his great Grandsire landed had before. But, for he found those vessels were to fewe, That into France his Army should conuay: He sent to Belgia, whose great store he knewe, Might now at neede supply him euery way. His bounty ample, as the windes that blewe, Such Barkes for Portage out of eury bay In Holland, Zealand, and in Flanders, brings; As spred the wide sleeue with their canuase wings. But first seauen Ships from Rochester are sent, The narrow Seas, of all the French to sweepe: All men of Warre with scripts of Mart that went, And had command, the Coast of France to keepe: The comming of a Nauie to preuent, And view what strength, was in the Bay of Deepe: And if they found it like to come abroad, To doe their best to fire it in the Road. Three as tall Ships, as er did Cable tewe, The Henry Royall, at her parting thence, Like the huge Ruck from Gillingham that flewe: Bottoms as good as euer spread a clue: All hauing charge, their voyage hauing bin, Before Southampton to take Souldiers in. Twelue Merchants Ships, of mighty burthen all, New off the Stocks, that had beene rigd for Stoad, That ready were their Merchandize to load, Straitly commanded by the Admirall, At the same Port to settle their aboad: And each of these a Pinnis at command, To put her fraught conueniently to land. Eight goodly Ships, so Bristow ready made, Which to the King they bountifully lent, With Spanish Wines which they for Ballast lade, In happy speed of his braue Voyage ment, Hoping his Conquest should enlarge their Trade, And there-withall a rich and spacious Tent: And as, this Fleet the Seuerne Seas doth stem, Fiue more from Padstowe came along with them. The Hare of Loo, a right good Ship well knowne, The yeare before that twice the Strayts had past, Two wealthy Spanish Merchants did her owne, Who then but lately had repaird her wast; For from her Deck a Pyrate she had blowne, After a long Fight, and him tooke at last: And from Mounts Bay sixe more, that still in sight, Wayted with her before the Ile of Wight. From Plymmouth next came in the Blazing Starre, And fiery Dragon to take in their fraught; With other foure, especiall men of Warre, That in the Bay of Portugall had fought; And though returning from a Voyage farre, Stemd that rough Sea, when at the highst it wrought: With these, of Dertmouth seaun good Ships there were, The golden Cressant in their tops that beare. So Lyme, three Ships into the Nauy sent, Of which the Sampson scarse a month before, Had sprung a Planke, and her mayne Mast had spent, With extreame perill that she got to shore; With them fiue other out of Waymouth went, Which by Southampton, were made vp a score: With those that rode at pleasure in the Bay, And that at Anchor before Portsmouth lay. Next these, Newcastle furnisheth the Fleet With nine good Hoyes of necessary vse; The Danish Pyrats, valiantly that beet, Offring to Sack them as they sayld for Sluce: Six Hulks from Hull at Humbers mouth them meet, Which had them oft accompanied to Pruce. Fiue more from Yarmouth falling them among, That had for Fishing beene prepared long. The Cowe of Harwich, neuer put to flight, For Hides, and Furres, late to Muscouia bound, Of the same Port, another namd the Spight, That in her comming lately through the Sound, After a two-dayes-still-continued fight, Had made three Flemings runne themselues a ground; With three neat Flee-boats which with them doe take, Six Ships of Sandwich vp the Fleet to make. Nine Ships for the Nobility there went, Of able men, the enterprize to ayde, Which to the King most liberally they lent, At their owne charge, and bountifully payde, Northumberland, and Westmerland in sent Fourescore at Armes a peece, themselues and layde At six score Archers each, as Suffolke showes, Twenty tall men at Armes, with forty Bowes. Warwick and Stafford leauied at no lesse Then noble Suffolke, nor doe offer more Of men at Armes, and Archers which they presse, Of their owne Tenants, Armd with their owne store: Their forwardnesse fore-showes their good successe In such a Warre, as had not beene before: And other Barrons vnder Earles that were, Yet dard with them an equall charge to beare. Darcy and Camois, zealous for the King, Berckley, Powis, Burrell, fast together cling; Seymer, and Saint Iohn for the busnesse closse, Each twenty Horse, and forty foote doe bring More, to nine hundred mounting in the grosse In those nine Ships, and fitly them bestowd, Which with the other fall into the Road. From Holland, Zeland, and from Flanders wonne By weekely pay, threescore twelue Bottoms came, From fifty vpward, to fiue hundred Tunne; For eury vse a Marriner could name, Whose glittering Flags against the Radient Sunne, Showd as the Sea had all beene of a flame; For Skiffes, Crayes, Scallops, and the like, why these From eury small Creeke, coured all the Seas. The man whose way from London hapd to lye, By those he met might guesse the generall force, Daily encountred as he passed by, Now with a Troupe of Foote, and then of Horse, To whom the people still themselues apply, Bringing them victuals as in mere remorce: And still the acclamation of the presse, Saint George for England, to your good successe. There might a man haue seene in eury Streete, The Father bidding farewell to his Sonne: Small Children kneeling at their Fathers feete: The Wife with her deare Husband ner had done: Brother, his Brother, with adieu to greete: One Friend to take leaue of another runne: The Mayden with her best beloud to part, Gaue him her hand, who tooke away her heart. The nobler Youth the common ranke aboue, On their coruetting Coursers mounted faire, One ware his Mistris Garter, one her Gloue; And he a lock of his deare Ladies haire; And he her Colours, whom he most did loue; There was not one but did some Fauour weare: And each one tooke it, on his happy speede, To make it famous by some Knightly deede. The cloudes of dust, that from the wayes arose, Which in their martch, the trampling Troupes doe reare: When as the Sunne their thicknesse doth oppose In his descending, shining wondrous cleare, To the beholder farre off standing showes Like some besieged Towne, that were on fire: As though fore-telling er they should returne, That many a Citie yet secure must burne. The well-rigd Nauie falne into the Road, For this short Cut with victuall fully stord, The King impatient of their long aboad, Commands his Army instantly aboard, Casting to haue each Company bestowd, As then the time conuenience could afford; The Ships appointed wherein they should goe, And Boats prepard for waftage to and fro. To be imbarqud when euery Band comes downe, Each in their order as they mustred were, Or by the difference of their Armings knowne, Or by their Colours; for in Ensignes there, Some wore the Armes of their most ancient Towne, Others againe their owne Diuises beare, There was not any, but that more or lesse, Something had got, that something should expresse. Stanzas following. First, in the Kentish Stremer was a Wood, Out of whose top an arme that held a Sword, As their right Embleme; and to make it good, They aboue other onely had a Word, Which was; Vnconquerd; as that freest had stood. Bore a Blacke Lyon Rampant, sore that bled, With a Field-Arrow darted through the head. ancient liberties, by surprising the Conqueror like a mouing The men of Surrey, Cheeky Blew and gold, Which for braue Warren their first Earle they wore, In many a Field that honourd was of olde: And Hamshere next in the same Colours bore, Three Lions Passant, th Armes of Beuis bould, Who through the World so famous was of yore; A siluer Tower, Dorsets Red Banner beares; The Cornishmen two Wrestlers had for theirs. County, lying vpon the French sea. The Deuonshire Band, a Beacon set on fire, Sommerset a Virgine bathing in a Spring, In Gold three Bloudy Cheuernells doe bring; Wiltshire a Crowned Piramed; As nigher Then any other to martch to the King; Barkshire a Stag, vnder an Oake that stood, Oxford a White Bull wading in a Flood. Gloster borne by the City. The mustred men for Buckingham, are gone Vnder the Swan, the Armes of that olde Towne, The Londoners, and Middlesex as one, Are by the Red Crosse, and the Dagger knowne; The Men of Essex ouermatchd by none, Vnder Queene Hellens Image Martching downe; The Souldiers sent from Cambridgshire, a Bay Vpon a Mountaine watred with a shower: Hartford two Harts that in a Riuer play; Bedfords an Eagle pearcht vpon a Tower, And Huntington a People proud as they, Not giuing place to any for their power, A youthfull Hunter, with a Chaplet Crownd, In a pyde Lyam leading forth his Hound. Northampton with a Castle seated high, Supported by two Lyons thither came; The men of Rutland, to them marching nie, In their rich Ensigne beare an Ermine Ram, And Lestershire that on their strength relye, A Bull and Mastiue fighting for the game. Lincolne a Ship most neatly that was limd In all her Sailes with Flags and Pennons trimd. Stout Warwickshire, her ancient badge the Beare, Worster a Peare-Tree laden with the Fruit, A Golden Fleece and Hereford doth weare, Stafford a Hermet in his homely sute, Shropshire a Falcon towring in the Ayre, And for the Shiere whose surface seems most brute, Darby, an Eagle sitting on a Roote, A swathed Infant holding in her foote. Shiere, on which many Hawkes were wont to airy. Olde Nottingham, an Archer clad in greene, Vnder a Tree with his drawne Bowe that stood, Which in a checkquerd Flagge farre off was seene: It was the Picture of olde Robin Hood, And Lancashire not as the least I weene, Thorough three Crownes, three Arrowes smeard with blood: Cheshiere a Banner very square and broad, Wherein a man vpon a Lyon rode. yet by many places there celebrated. A flaming Lance, the Yorkshiere men for them, As those for Durham neere againe at hand, A Myter crowned with a Diadem: An Armed man, the men of Cumberland: So Westmerland linkd with it in one Stem, A Ship that wrackt lay fierd vpon the sand: Northumberland with these comn as a Brother, Two Lyons fighting tearing one another. their Naggs. dangerous Seas, betwixt England and Ireland. expressed in the fight between the golden and red Lyons. Thus as themselues the English men had showd Vnder the Ensigne of each seurall Shiere, The Natiue Welch who no lesse honour owd To their owne King, nor yet lesse valiant were, In one strong Regment had themselues bestowd, And of the rest, resumed had the Reare: To their owne Quarter marching as the rest, As neatly Armd, and brauely as the best. Rowing her selfe within a quiet Bay; Those men of South-Wales of the mixed blood, Had of the Welch the leading of the way: Caermardin in her Colours beare a Rood, Whereon an olde man leand himselfe to stay At a Starre pointing; which of great renowne, Was skilfull Merlin, namer of that Towne. harbours in the knowne world, therefore not vnaptly so From which, out of the Battlement aboue, A flame shot vp it selfe into the skye: The men of Munmouth for the ancient loue To that deare Country; neighbouring them so nie Next after them in Equipage that moue, Three Crownes Imperiall which supported were, With three Armd Armes, in their proud Ensigne beare. Seuerne beginneth to widden, as when Pirats haue come in to giue warning to the other Maratyne Countries. birth-place, and to expresse his principalities. The men of Brecknock brought a Warlick Tent, Vpon whose top there sate a watchfull Cock, Radnor, a mountaine of a high assent, Thereon a Shepheard keeping of his Flock, As Cardigan the next to them that went, Came with a Mermayde sitting on a Rock, And Merioneth beares as these had done Three dancing Goates against the rising Sunne. Maratine part vpon the Irish Sea. inaccessible Mountaines. Those of Montgomery, beare a prancing Steed, Denbigh a Neptune with his three-forkd Mace: Flintshiere a Workmayd in her Summers weed, With Sheafe and Sickle with a warlick pace Those of Caernaruon not the least in speed, Though marching last in the mayne Armies face Three golden Eagles in their Ensigne brought, Vnder which oft braue Owen Guyneth fought. little Tract. The Seas amazed at the fearefull sight, Of Armes, and Ensignes, that aboard were brought, Of Streamers, Banners, Pennons, Ensignes pight, Vpon each Pup and Prowe; and at the fraught, So full of terror, that it hardly might Into a naturall course againe be brought, As the vaste Nauie which at Anchor rides, Proudly presumes to shoulder out the Tides. The Fleet then full, and floating on the Maine, The numerous Masts, with their braue Topsailes spred, When as the Winde a little doth them straine, Seeme like a Forrest bearing her proud head Against some rough flawe, that forerunns a raine; So do they looke from euery loftie sted, Which with the Surges tumbled too and fro, Seeme euen to bend, as trees are seene to doe. From euery Ship when as the Ordnance rore, Of their depart, that all might vnderstand, When as the zealous people from the shore, Againe with fires salute them from the Land, For so was order left with them before, To watch the Beacons, with a carefull hand, Which being once fierd, the people more or lesse, Should all to Church, and pray for their successe. They shape their Course into the Month of Seyne, That destind Flood those Nauies to receiue, Before whose fraught her France had prostrate laine, As now she must this, that shall neuer leaue, Vntill the Engines that it doth containe, Into the ayre her heightned walls shall heaue; Whose stubborne Turrets had refusd to bow, To that braue Nation that shall shake them now. Long Boates with Scouts are put to land before, Vpon light Naggs the Countrey to discry, Whilst the braue Army setting is on shore, To view what strength the enemy had nie, Pressing the bosome of large France so sore, That her pale Genius, in affright doth flye To all her Townes and warnes them to awake, And for her safety vp their Armes to take. At Paris, Roan, and Orleance, she calls, And at their gates with gronings doth complaine: Then cries she out, O get vp to your walls: The English Armies are returnd againe, Which in two Battailes gaue those fatall falls, At Cressie, and at Poyteers, where lay slaine Our conquered Fathers, which with very feare Quake in their Graues to feele them landed here. The King of France now hauing vnderstood, Of Henries entrance, but too well improud, He cleerly saw that deere must be the blood, That it must cost, er he could be remoud; He sends to make his other Sea Townes good, Neuer before so much it him behoud; In eury one a Garison to lay, Fearing fresh powers from England eury day. To the highst earth whilst awfull Henry gets, From whence strong Harflew he might easlest see, With sprightly words, and thus their courage whets, In yonder walls be Mynes of gold quoth he Hes a poore Slaue, that thinkes of any debts; Harflew shall pay for all, it ours shall be: This ayre of France doth like me wondrous well, Lets burne our Ships, for here we meane to dwell. But through his Hoast, he first of all proclaimd In paine of death, no English man should take From the Religious, aged, or the maymd, Or women that could no resistance make: To gaine his owne for that he onely aymd; Nor would haue such to suffer for his sake: Which in the French when they the same did heare Bred of this braue King, a religious feare. His Army rangd, in order fitting warre, Each with some greene thing doth his Murrian crowne, With his mayne standard fixt vpon the Carre; Comes the great King before thintrenched Towne, Whilst from the walls the people gazing are, In all their sights he sets his Army downe; Nor for their shot he careth not a pin, But seekes where he his Battery may begin. And into three, his Army doth diuide, His strong aproaches on three parts to make; Himselfe on thone, Clarence on thother side, To Yorke and Suffolke he the third doth take, The Mines the Duke of Glocester doth guide; Then causd his Ships the Riuer vp to Stake, That none with Victuall should the Towne relieue Should the Sword faile, with Famine them to grieue. From his Pauillion where he sate in State, Armd for the Siedge, and buckling on his Shield, Braue Henry sends his Herault to the Gate, By Trumpets sound, to summon them to yeeld, And to accept his Mercy, ere to late, Or else to say ere he forsooke the field, Harflew should be but a meere heape of Stones, Her buildings buried with her Owners bones. France on this sudaine put into a fright, With the sad newes of Harflew in distresse, Whose inexpected, miserable plight, She on the suddaine, knew not to redresse, But vrgd to doe the vtmost that she might, The peoples feares and clamours to suppresse, Raiseth a power with all the speede she could, Somewhat thereby, to loose King Henries hold. Leading those Forces levied for the turne, By which they thought their Titles to aduance, And of their Countrey endlesse praise to earne, But it with them farre otherwise doth chance, For when they saw the Villages to burne, And high-towrd Harflew round ingirt with fires, They with their powers to Cawdebeck retire. Like as a Hinde when shee her Calfe doth see, Lighted by chance into a Lions pawes, From which should shee aduenture it to free, Shee must her selfe fill his deuouring Iawes, And yet her young one, still his prey must be, Shee so instructed is by Natures Lawes: With them so fares it, which must needs goe downe If they would fight; and yet must loose the Towne: Now doe they mount their Ordnance for the day, Their scaling Ladders rearing to the walls, Their battering Rammes against the gates they lay, Their brazen slings send in the wilde-fire balls, Baskets of twigs now carie stones and clay, And to thassault who furiously not falls; Which then vnfelt, yet gaue the greatest blowe. Rampiers of earth the painefull Pyoners raise With the walls equall, close vpon the Dike, To passe by which the Souldier that assayes, On Planks thrust ouer, one him downe doth strike: Him with a mall a second English payes, A second French transpearcd him with a Pyke: That from the height of the embatteld Towers, Their mixed blood ranne downe the walls in showers. A French man back into the Towne doth fall, With a sheafe Arrow shot into the head; An English man in scaling of the wall, From the same place is by a stone struck dead; Tumbling vpon them logs of wood, and all, That any way for their defence might sted: The hills at hand re-ecchoing with the din Of shouts without, and fearefull shrickes within. When all at once the English men assaile, The French within all valiantly defend, And in a first assault, if any faile, They by a second striue it to amend: Out of the Towne come quarries thick as haile; As thick againe their Shafts the English send: The bellowing Canon from both sides doth rore, With such a noyse as makes the Thunder pore. Now vpon one side you should heare a cry, And all that Quarter clowded with a smother; The like from that against it by and by; As though the one were eccho to the other, The King and Clarence so their turnes can ply: And valiant Gloster showes himselfe their brother; Whose Mynes to the besiegd more mischiefe doe, Then with thassaults aboue, the other two. An olde man sitting by the fier side, Decrepit with extreamity of Age, Stilling his little Grand-childe when it cride, Almost distracted with the Batteries rage: Sometimes doth speake it faire, sometimes doth chide, As thus he seekes its mourning to asswage, By chance a Bullet doth the chimney hit, Which falling in, doth kill both him and it. Whilst the sad weeping Mother sits her downe, To giue her little new-borne Babe the Pap: A lucklesse quarry leueld at the Towne, Kills the sweet Baby sleeping in her lap, That with the fright shee falls into a swoone, From which awakd, and mad with the mishap; As vp a Rampire shreeking she doth clim, Comes a great Shot, and strikes her lim from lim. Whilst a sort runne confusedly to quench, Some Pallace burning, or some fired Street, Calld from where they were fighting in the Trench; They in their way with Balls of Wilde-fire meet, So plagued are the miserable French, Not aboue head, but also vnder feet: For the fierce English vowe the Towne to take, Or of it soone a heape of stones to make. Hot is the Siege the English comming on, As men so long to be kept out that scorne, Carelesse of wounds as they were made of stone; As with their teeth the walls they would haue torne: Into a Breach who quickly is not gone; Is by the next behind him ouer-borne: So that they found a place that gaue them way, They neuer card what danger therein lay. From eury Quarter they their course must plye, Ast pleasd the King them to thassault to call: Now on the Duke of Yorke the charge doth lye: To Kent and Cornwall then the turne doth fall: Then Huntingdon vp to the walls they crye: Then Suffolke, and then Excester; which all In their meane Souldiers habits vsd to goe, Taking such part as those that ownd them doe. The men of Harflew rough excursions make, Vpon the English watchfull in their Tent, Whose courages they to their cost awake, With many a wound that often back them sent, So proud a Sally that durst vndertake, And in the Chase pell mell amongst them went, For on the way such ground of them they win, That some French are shut out, some English in. Nor idely sit our Men at Armes the while, Foure thousand Horse that eury day goe out; And of the Field are Masters many a mile, By putting the Rebellious French to rout; No Peasants them with promises beguile: Another busnesse they were come about; For him they take, his Ransome must redeeme, Onely French Crownes, the English men esteeme. Whilst English Henry lastly meanes to trye: By three vast Mynes, the walls to ouerthrowe. The French men their approches that espye, By Countermynes doe meete with them belowe, And as opposed in the Workes they lye: Vp the Besieged the Besiegers blowe, That stifled quite, with powder as with dust, Longer to walls they found it vaine to trust. Till Gaucourt then, and Tuttivile that were The Townes Commanders, with much perill finde The Resolution that the English beare; As how their owne to yeelding were enclinde, Summon to parly, offring frankly there; If that ayde came not by a day assignde, To giue the Towne vp, might their liues stand free: As for their goods, at Henries will to be. And hauing wonne their conduct to the King, Those hardy Chiefes on whom the charge had layne: Thither those well-fed Burgesses doe bring, What they had offred strongly to maintaine In such a case, although a dangrous thing, Yet they so long vpon their knees remaine: That fiue dayes respight from his Grant they haue, Which was the most, they for their liues durst craue. The time perfixed comming to expire, And their reliefe ingloriously delayd: Nothing within their sight but sword, and fire; And bloody Ensignes eury where displayd: The English still within themselues entire, When all these things they seriously had wayd, To Henries mercy found that they must trust, For they perceiud their owne to be iniust. The Ports are opened, weapons layd aside, And from the walls thArtillary displacd: The Armes of England are aduancd in pride: The watch Tower, with Saint Georges Banner gracd: Liue Englands Henry, all the people cride: Into the Streetes their women runne in hast, Bearing their little Children, for whose sake They hopd the King would the more mercy take. The gates thus widened with the breath of Warre; Their ample entrance to the English gaue: There was no dore that then had any barre; For of their owne not any thing they haue: When Henry comes on his Emperiall Carre: To whom they kneele their liues alone to saue. Strucken with wonder, when that face they sawe, Wherein such mercy was, with so much awe. And first themselues the English to secure, Doubting what danger might be yet within; The strongest Forts, and Citadell make sure, To showe that they could keepe as well as win, And though the spoyles them wondrously alure, To fall to pillage er they will begin, They shut each passage, by which any power Might be brought on to hinder, but an hower. That Conquering King which entring at the gate, Borne by the presse as in the ayre he swamme: Vpon the suddaine layes aside his state, And of a Lyon is become a Lambe: He is not now what he was but of late: But on his bare feete to the Church he came: By his example, as did all the presse, To giue God thankes, for his first good successe. And sends his Herauld to King Charles to say, That though he thus was setled on his shore, Yet he his Armes was ready downe to lay, His ancient right if so he would restore: But if the same he wilfully denay, To stop theffusion of their Subiects gore; He frankly offreth in a single fight, With the young Daulphine to decide his right. Eight dayes at Harflew he doth stay to heare, What answere back, his Herauld him would bring: But when he found that he was ner the neere; And that the Daulphine meaneth no such thing, As to fight single; nor that any were To deale for composition from the King: He casts for Callice to make forth his way, And takes such Townes, as in his Iourneyes lay. But first his busnesse he doth so contriue, To curbe the Townes-men, should they chance to stirre Of Armes, and Office he doth them depriue, And to their roomes the English doth preferre: Out of the Ports all Vagrants he doth driue, And therein sets his Vnckle Excester: This done, to martch he bids the thundring Drummes, To scourge proud France wh now her Cqueror comes. The King and Daulphine hauing vnderstood, How on his way this haughty Henry was Ouer the Soame, which is a dangerous flood; Pluckt downe the Bridges that might giue him passe; And eury thing, if fit for humane food, Causd to be forragd; to a wondrous masse And more then this, his Iourneyes to fore-slowe, He scarce one day vnskirmishd with, doth goe. But on his march, in midst of all his foes; He like a Lyon keepes them all at bay, And when they seeme him strictly to enclose; Yet through the thickst he hewes him out a way: Nor the proud Daulphine dare him to oppose; Though offring oft his Army to fore-lay: Nor all the power the enuious French can make, Force him one foote, his path but to forsake. And each day as his Army doth remoue, Marching along vpon Soames Marshy side, His men at Armes on their tall Horses proue, To finde some shallow, ouer where to ryde, But all in vaine against the Streame they stroue, Till by the helpe of a laborious guide, A Ford was found to set his Army ore Which neuer had discouered beene before. The newes divulgd that he had waded Soame, And safe to shore his Caridges had brought, Into the Daulphins bosome strooke so home, And one the weakenesse of King Charles so wrought; That like the troubled Sea, when it doth Foame, As in a rage, to beate the Rocks to nought; So doe they storme, and curse on curse they heapt Gainst those which should the passages haue kept. And at that time, both resident in Roan, Thither for this assembling all the Peeres, Whose Counsailes now must vnderprop their Throne Against the Foe; which, not a man but feares; Yet in a moment confident are growne, When with fresh hopes, each one his fellow cheeres, That ere the English to their Callis got, Some for this spoile should pay a bloudy shot. Therfore they both in solemne Counsaile satt, With Berry and with Britaine their Alies; Now speake they of this course, and then of that, As to insnare him how they might diuise; Something they faine would doe, but know not what, At length the Duke Alanzon vp doth rise, And crauing silence of the King and Lords, Against the English, brake into these words. Had this vnbridled youth an Army led, That any way were worthy of your feare, Against our Nation, that durst turne the head, Such as the former English forces were, This care of yours, your Countrey then might sted, To tell you then, who longer can forbeare, That into question, you our valour bring, To call a Counsaile for so poore a thing. A Route of tatterd Rascalls starued so, As forced through extreamity of need To rake for scraps on Dunghils as they goe, And on the Berries of the Shrubs to feed, Besides with fluxes are enfeebled so, And other foule diseases that they breed, That they, there Armes disabled are to sway, But in their march doe leaue them on the way. And to our people but a handfull are, Scarse thirtie thousand, when to Land they came, Of which to England dayly some repayre, Many from Harflew carried sicke and lame, Fitter for Spittles, and the Surgions care, Then with their Swords on vs to winne them fame, Vnshod, and without stockings are the best, And those by Winter miserably opprest. To let them dye vpon their march abroad, And Fowles vpon their Carkases to feed, The heapes of them vpon the common road A great infection likely were to breed, For our owne safeties see them then bestowd, And doe for them this charitable deede: Vnder our Swords together let them fall, And one that day they dye, be buried all. This bold invectiue forcd against the Foe, Although it most of the Assembly seasd, Yet those which better did the English know, Were but a little with his speeches pleasd, And that the Duke of Berry meant to showe: Which when the murmure somewhat was appeasd, After a while their listning silence breakes, And thus in answere of Alanzon speakes. My Liedge, quoth he, and you my Lords, and Peeres, Whom this great businesse chiefely doth concerne, By my experience, now so many yeeres To know the English I am not to learne; Nor I more feeling haue of humane feares Than fitteth Manhood, nor doe hope to earne Suffrage from any; but by zeale am wonne, To speake my minde here, as the Duke hath done. Theuents of Warre are various as I know And say, the losse vpon the English light, Yet may a dying man giue such a blow, As much may hinder his proud Conquerours might; It is enough our puissant power to showe To the weake English, now vpon their flight, When want, and winter, strongly spurre them on, You else but slay them, that would faine be gon. I like our Forces their first course should hold, To skirmish with them, vpon euery stay, But fight by no meanes with them, though they would, Except they finde them forraging for pray, So still you haue them shut vp in a Fould, And still to Callis keepe them in their way; So Fabius wearied Hanibal, so we May English Henry, pleased if you be. And of the English rid your Countrey cleane, If on their backs, but Callice walles they win, Whose Frontier Townes you easly may maintaine, With a strong Army still to keepe them in; Then let our Ships make good the mouth of Seyne, And at your pleasure Harflew you may winne, Ere with Supplys againe they can inuade, Spent in the Voyage lately hither made. That day at Poyteers, in that bloudy Field, The sudaine turne in that great Battell then, Shall euer teach me, whilest I Armes can weeld, Neuer to trust to multitudes of men; Twas the first day that ere I wore a Sheeld, Oh let me neuer see the like agen! Where their Blacke Edward such a Battell wonne As to behold it might amaze the Sunne. There did I see our conquered Fathers fall, Before the English on that fatall ground, When as to ours their number was but small, And with braue Spirits France ner did more abound, Yet oft that Battaile into minde I call, Whereas of ours, one man seemd all one wound, I instance this; yet humbly here submit My selfe to fight, if you shall thinke it fit. The Marshall and the Constable about To second, what this sager Duke had said: The youthfull Lords into a cry brake out, Gainst their opinions, so that ouer-swayd, Some seeming of their Loyalties to doubt; Alanzon as an Oracle obayd, And not a French then present, but doth sweare To kill an English if ynow there were. A Herault posted presently away, The King of England to the field to dare, To bid him cease his spoyle, nor to delay Gainst the French power his forces but prepare: For that King Charles determind to display His bloody Ensignes, and through France declare The day, and place, that Henry should set downe, In which their Battailes, should dispose the Crowne. This newes to Henry by the Herault brought, As one dispassiond soberly quoth he Had your King pleasd, we sooner might haue fought; For now my Souldiers much enfeebled be: Nor day, nor place, for Battaile shall be sought By English Henry: but if he seeke me, I to my vtmost will my selfe defend, And to thAlmighties pleasure leaue the end. The brute of this intended Battaile spred, The coldnesse of each sleeping courage warmes, And in the French that daring boldnesse bred: Like casting Bees that they arise in swarmes, Thinking the English downe so farre to tred, As past that day ner more to rise in Armes, Textirpe the name, if possible it were, At least not after to be heard of there. As when you see the enuious Crowe espye, Something that shee doth naturally detest: With open throat how shee doth squall and crye; And from the next Groue calleth in the rest, And they for those beyond them bawling flye, Till their foule noyse doth all the ayre infest: Thus French, the French to this great Battaile call, Vpon their swords to see the English fall. And to the King when seriously one tolde, With what an Host he should encountred be, Gam noting well, the King did him behold, In the reporting; Merrily quoth he My Liege Ile tell you if I may be bold, We will diuide this Army into three: One part well kill, the second prisoners stay; And for the third, well leaue to runne away. But for the Foe came hourely in so fast, Lest they his Army should disordred take: The King who wisely doth the worst forecast, His speedy martch doth presently forsake, Into such forme and his Battalion cast; That doe their worst they should not easly shake: For that his scouts which forragd had the Coast, Bad him at hand expect a puissant Host. On which ere long the English Vanward light, Which York, of men the brauest, doth command, When either of them in the others sight, He causd the Army instantly to stand, As though preparing for a present Fight, And rideth forth from his couragious Band, To view the French, whose numbers ouer spread, The troubled Country on whose earth they tread. Now were both Armies got vpon that ground, As on a Stage, where they their strengthes must trye, Whence from the wydth of many a gaping wound, Theres many a soule into the Ayre must flye: Meane while the English that some ease had found; By the aduantage of a Village nie, There set them downe the Battell to abide, Where they the place had strongly fortifide. Made drunke with pride the haughty French disdaine, Lesse then their owne, a multitude to view, Nor aske of God the victory to gaine, Vpon the English wext so poore and fewe, To stay their slaughter thinking it a paine, And lastly to that insolence they grewe, Quoyts, Lots, and Dice for Englishmen to cast, And sweare to pay, the Battaile being past. For knots of corde to eury Towne they send, The Captiud English that they caught to binde, For to perpetuall slaury they intend: Those that aliue they on the Field should finde, So much as that they feard lest they should spend Too many English, wherefore they assignde Some to keepe fast those, fayne that would be gon After the Fight, to try their Armes vpon. One his bright sharpe-egd Semiter doth showe, Offring to lay a thousand Crownes in pride That he two naked English at one blowe, Bound back to back will at the wasts diuide, Some bett his sword will dot, some others no, After the Battaile, and theyll haue it tride: Another wafts his Blade about his head, And shewes them how their hamstrings he will shread. They part their prisoners, passing them for debt, And in their Ransome ratibly accord To a Prince of ours, a Page of theirs they set; As for our Gentry them to hyre theyll let, And as good cheape as they can them afford, Branded for Slaues that if they hapt to stray, Knowne by the marke, them any one might slay. And cast to make a Chariot for the King, Painted with Antickes, and ridiculous toyes, In which they meane to Paris him to bring, To make sport to their Madames and their Boyes, And will haue Rascalls, Rymes of him to sing, Made in his mockry; and in all these ioyes, They bid the Bells to ring, and people crie, And to the King and Daulphine sent away Who at that time residing were in Roane To be partakers of that glorious day: Wherein the English should be ouerthrowne, Lest that of them ensuing times should say, That for their safety they forsooke their owne: When France did that braue victory obtaine, That shall her lastingst monument remaine. The poore distressed Englishmen the whiles, Not dard by doubt, and lesse appauld with dread Of their Armd Pykes, some sharpning are the pyles, The Archer grinding his barbd Arrow head: Their Bills and Blades, some whetting are with Files: And some their Armours strongly Riueted: Some pointing Stakes to stick into the ground, To guard the Bow-men, and their Horse to wound. The night fore-running this most dreadfull day: The French that all to iollity encline: Some fall to dancing, some againe to play: And some are drinking to this great Designe: But all in pleasure spend the night away: The Tents with lights, the Fields with Boone-fires shine: The common Souldiers Free-mens Catches sing: With showtes and laughter all the Campe doth ring. The wearied English watchfull or their Foes, The depth of night then drawing on so fast That fayne a little would themselues repose, With thanks to God, doe take that small repast Which that poore Village willingly bestowes: And hauing placd their Sentinels at last, They fall to Prayer, and in their Cabins blest, Trefresh their spirits, then tooke them to their rest. In his Pauillion Princely Henry layd, Whilst all his Army round about him slept, His restlesse head vpon his Helmet stayd, For carefull thoughts his eyes long waking kept: Great God quoth he withdraw not now thy ayde: Nor let my Father Henries sinnes be heapt On my transgressions, vp the Summe to make, For which thou mayst me vtterly forsake. Westminster by his first Wife Queene Anne. King Richards wrongs, to minde, Lord doe not call, Nor how for him my Father did offend, From vs alone deriue not thou his fall, Whose odious life causd his vntimely end, That by our Almes be expiated all: Let not that sinne on me his Sonne desend, When as his body I translated haue, And buried in an honourable Graue. These things thus pondring, sorrow-ceasing sleepe, From cares to rescue his much troubled minde, Vpon his Eye-lids stealingly doth creepe, And in soft slumbers euery sense doth binde, As vndisturbed euery one to keepe When as that Angell to whom God assignd, The guiding of the English, gliding downe The silent Campe doth with fresh courage crowne. His glittering wings he gloriously displaies, Ouer the Hoste as euery way it lyes With golden Dreames their trauell, and repaies, This Herault from the Rector of the skies, In Vision warnes them not to vse delayes, But to the Battell cheerefully to rise, And be victorious, for that day at hand, He would amongst them for the English stand. The dawne scarse drewe the curtaines of the East, But the late wearied Englishmen awake, And much refreshed with a little rest Themselues soone ready for the Battaile make, Not any one but feeleth in his breast, That sprightly fire which Courage bids him take, For ere the Sunne next rising went to bed, The French by them in triumph should be led. And from their Cabins, ere the French arose, Drownd in the pleasure of the passed night, The English cast their Battailes to dispose, Fit for the ground whereon they were to fight: Foorth that braue King couragious Henry goes, An hower before that it was fully light, To see if there might any place be found, To giue his Hoste aduantage by the ground. Where twas his hap a Quicksett hedge to view, Well growne in height; and for his purpose thin, Yet by the Ditch vpon whose banke it grew, He found it to be difficult to winne, Especially if those of his were true, Amongst the shrubbs that he should set within, By which he knew their strength of Horse must come, If they would euer charge his Vanguard home. And of three hundred Archers maketh choice, Some to be taken out of euery Band, The strongest Bowmen, by the generall voyce, Such as beside were valient of their hand, And to be so imployed, as would reioyce, Appointing them behinde the hedge to stand, To shrowde themselues from sight, and to be mute, Vntill a signall freely bad them shute. The gamesome Larke now got vpon her Wing, As twere the English earely to awake, And to wide heauen her cheerefull notes doth sing, As shee for them would intercession make, Nor all the noyse that from below doth spring, Her ayrie walke can force her to forsake, Of some much noted, and of others lesse, But yet of all presaging good successe. The lazie French their leisure seem to take, And in their Cabins keepe themselues so long, Till flocks of Rauens them with noyse awake, Ouer the Army like a Cloud that hong, Which greater haste inforceth them to make, When with their croaking all the Countrey rong, Which boaded slaughter as the most doe say, But by the French it turned was this way. That this diuyning Foule well vnderstood, Vpon that place much gore was to be spilld, And as those Birds doe much delight in blood, With humane flesh would haue their gorges filld, So waited they vpon their Swords for food, To feast vpon the English being killd, Then little thinking that these came in deed On their owne mangled Carkases to feed. When soone the French preparing for the Field, Their armed troops are setting in array, Whose wondrous numbers they can hardly weeld, The place too little wherevpon they lay, They therefore to necessitie must yeeld, And into Order put them as they may, Whose motion sounded like to Nilus fall, That the vaste ayre was deafned therewithall. With the grand Marshall, men of great command: Some for their place, some for their birth-right stand, The Daulphine of Averney to aduance His worth and honour of a puissant hand: The Earle of Ewe in Warre that had beene bred, These mighty men the mighty Vanward led. The mayne brought forward by the Duke of Barre, Neuers, and Beamont, men of speciall name: Alanzon thought, not equalld in this Warre, With them Salines, Rous, and Grandpre came, Their long experience, who had fetcht from farre, Whom this expected Conquest doth enflame, Consisting most of Crosbowes, and so great, As France her selfe it well might seeme to threat. The Duke of Brabant of high valour knowne, To Arthur Earle of Richmounts selfe alone, They leaue the Right wing to be guided there: Lewes of Burbon, second yet to none, Led on the left; with him that mighty Peere Large France entytled, her great Master then. The Duke of Yorke the English Vanward guides, Of our strong Archers, that consisted most; Which with our Horse was wingd on both the sides: Taffront so great and terrible an Host; There valiant Fanhope, and there Beamount rides, With Willoughby which scowred had the Coast, That morning early, and had seene at large, How the Foe came, that then they were to charge. Henry himselfe, on the mayne Battell brings, Nor can these Legions of the French affright This Mars of men, this King of earthly Kings: Who seemd to be much pleased with the sight, As one ordaynd taccomplish mighty things; Who to the Field came in such braury dight: As to the English boades succesfull luck Before one stroke, on either side was struck. In Warlike state the Royall Standard borne Before him, as in splendrous Armes he road, Whilst his coruetting Courser seemd in scorne To touch the earth whereon he proudly troad, Lillyes, and Lyons quarterly adorne; His Shield, and his Caparison doe load: Vpon his Helme a Crowne with Diamonds deckt, Which through the Field their Radient fiers reflect. The Duke of Gloster neere to him agen, Tassist his Brother in that dreadfull day, Oxford and Suffolke both true Marshiall men, Ready to keepe the Battell in Array, To Excester there was appointed then The Reare; on which their second succours lay: Which were the youth, most of the Noblest blood, Vnder the Ensignes of their names that stood. Then of the stakes he doth the care commend, To certaine troupes that actiue were and strong, Onely diuisd the Archers to defend, Pointed with Iron and of fiue foote long; To be remoud still which way they should bend, Where the French Horse should thickst vpon them throng Which when the Host to charge each other went, Showd his great wit that first did them inuent. Both Armies sit, and at the point to fight, The French themselues assuring of the day; Send to the King of England as in spight To know what he would for his Ransome pay, Who with this answere doth their scorne requite: I pray thee Herault wish the French to stay, And er the day be past, I hope to see, That for their Ransomes they shall send to me. The French which found how little Henry makes, Of their vaine boasts, as set therewith on fire, Whilst each one to his Ensigne him betakes; The Constable to raise their spleene the hyer, Thus speakes: Braue friends now for your Grandsires sakes, Your Country, Honours, or what may inspire Your soules with courage, straine vp all your powers, To make this day victoriously ours. Forward stout French, your valours and aduance, By taking vengeance for our Fathers slaine, And strongly fixe the Diadem of France, Which to this day vnsteady doth remaine: Now with your swords their Traytours bosomes lance, And with their bloods wash out that ancient staine, And make our earth drunke with the English gore, Which hath of ours oft surfited before. Let not one liue in England once to tell, What of their King, or of the rest became: Nor to the English, what in France befell: But what is bruted by the generall fame: But now the Drummes began so lowd to yell, As cut off further what he would declame: And Henry seeing them on so fast to make, Thus to his Souldiers comfortably spake. Thinke but vpon the iustnesse of our cause, And hes no man their number that will wey; Thus our great Grandsire purchasd his applause, The more they are, the greater is our prey, Well hand in hand wade into dangers iawes, And let report to England this Conuey That it for me no Ransome er shall rayse, Either Ile Conquer, or here end my dayes. It were no glory for vs to subdue Them, then our number, were the French no more; When in one Battaile twice our Fathers slue, Three times so many as themselues before, But to doe something that were strange and new: Wherefore I aske you Came we to this shore; Vpon these French our Fathers wan renowne, And with their swords well hewe yan Forrest downe. The meanest Souldier if in Fight he take, The greatest Prince in yonder Army knowne, Without controule shall him his prisoner make, And haue his Ransome freely as his owne: Now English lyes our Honour at the stake, And now or neuer be our Valour showne: God and our Cause, Saint George for England stands, Now Charge them English, fortune guide your hands. When hearing one wish all the valiant men At home in England, with them present were; The King makes answere instantly agen, I would not haue one man more then is here: If we subdue, lesse should our praise be then: If ouercome, lesse losse shall England beare: And to our numbers we should giue that deede, Which must from Gods owne powerfull hand proceede. The dreadfull Charge the Drummes & Trumpets sound, With hearts exalted, though with humbled eyes, When as the English kneeling on the ground, Extend their hands vp to the glorious skyes; Then from the earth as though they did rebound, Actiue as fire immediatly they rise: And such a shrill showt from their throats they sent, As made the French to stagger as they went. Wherewith they stopt, when Erpingham which led The Armie, sawe, the showt had made them stand, Wafting his Warder thrice about his head, He cast it vp with his auspicious hand, Which was the signall through the English spread, That they should Charge: which as a dread command Made them rush on, yet with a second rore, Frighting the French worse then they did before. But when they sawe the Enemie so slowe, Which they expected faster to come on, Some scattering Shot they sent out as to showe, That their approach they onely stood vpon; Which with more feruour made their rage to glowe, So much disgrace that they had vnder-gone. Which to amend with Ensignes let at large, Vpon the English furiously they Charge. At the full Moone looke how thvnweldy Tide, Shoud by some Tempest that from Sea doth rise At the full height, against the ragged side Of so me rough Cliffe of a Gigantick sise Foming with rage impetuously doth ride; The angry French in no lesse furious wise Of men at Armes vpon their ready Horse, Assayle the English to dispierce their force. When as those Archers there in Ambush layde, Hauing their Broad side as they came along, With their barbd Arrowes the French Horses payde: And in their flankes like cruell Hornets stong: They kick and crie, of late that proudly nayde: And from their seats their Armed Riders flong: They ranne together flying from the Dike, And make their Riders one another strike. And whilst the Front of the French Vanguard makes, Vpon the English thinking them to Route, Their Horses runne vpon the Armed stakes, And being wounded, turne themselues about: The Bit into his teeth the Courser takes, And from his Rank flyes with his Master out, Who either hurts or is hurt of his owne, If in the throng not both together throwne. Tumbling on heapes, some of their Horses cast With their foure feete all vp into the ayre: Vnder whose backs their Masters breath their last: Some breake their Raynes, and thence their Riders beare: Some with their feete stick in the Stirups fast, By their fierce Iades, are trayled here and there: Entangled in their Bridles, one back drawes, And pluckes the Bit out of anothers iawes. With showers of Shafts yet still the English ply The French so fast, vpon the point of flight: With the mayne Battell yet stood Henry by, Not all this while had medled in the Fight, Vpon the Horses as in Chase they flye, Arrowes so thick, in such aboundance light, That their broad buttocks men like Butts might see, Whereat for pastime Bow-men shooting be. When soone De Linnies and Sureres hast, To ayde their friends put to this shamefull foyle, With two light wings of Horse which had beene plact, Still to supply where any should recoyle: But yet their Forces they but vainely waste, For being light, into the generall spoyle. Great losse De Linnies shortly doth sustaine, Yet scapes himselfe; but braue Sureres slaine. The King who sees how well his Vanguard sped, Sends his command that instantly it stay, Desiring Yorke so brauely that had led, To hold his Souldiers in their first array, For it the Conflict very much might sted, Somewhat to fall aside, and giue him way, Till full vp to him he might bring his power, And make the Conquest compleate in an hower. Which Yorke obayes, and vp King Henry comes, When for his guidance he had got him roome. The dreadfull bellowing of whose strait-bracd Drummes, To the French sounded like the dreadfull doome, And them with such stupidity benummes, As though the earth had groaned from her wombe, For the grand slaughter ner began till then, Couering the earth with multitudes of men. Vpon the French what Englishman not falls, By the strong Bowmen beaten from their Steeds With Battle-axes, Halberts, Bills, and Maules, Where, in the slaughter euery one exceedes, Where euery man, his fellow forward calls, And shows him where some great-born Frenchman bleeds Whilst Scalps about like broken pot sherds fly, And kill, kill, kill, the Conquering English cry. Now wexed horror to the very height, And scarse a man but wet-shod went in gore, As two together are in deadly fight, And to death wounded, as one tumbleth ore, This Frenchman falling, with his very weight Doth kill another strucken downe before, As he againe so falling, likewise feeles His last breath hastned by anothers heeles. And whilst the English eagerly pursue The fearefull French before them still that fly, The points of Bills and Halbers they imbrue In their sicke Bowels, beaten downe that lye, No man respects how, or what blood he drew, Nor can heare those that for their mercie cry. Ears are dammd vp with howles and hellish sounds One fearefull noyse a fearefuller confounds. When the couragious Constable of France, Thvnlucky Vanguard valiantly that led, Sawe the day turnd by this disastrous chance, And how the French before the English fled; O stay quoth he your Ensignes yet aduance, Once more vpon the Enemy make head: Neuer let France say, we were vanquisht so, With our backs basely turnd vpon our Foe. Whom the Chattillyon hapned to accost, And seeing thus the Constable dismayde: Shift noble Lord quoth he the day is lost, If the whole world vpon the match were layde, I cannot thinke but that Black Edwards Ghost Assists the English, and our Horse hath frayde; If not, some Diuels they haue with them then, That fight against vs in the shapes of men. Not I my Lord, the Constable replies: By my blest soule, the Field I will not quit: Whilst two braue Battailes are to bring supplies: Neither of which one stroke haue strucken yet: Nay quoth Dampeir I doe not this aduise More then your selfe, that I doe feare a whit: Spurre vp my Lord, then side to side with mee, And that I feare not, you shall quickly see. They struck their Rowells to the bleeding sides Of their fierce Steeds into the ayre that sprong: And as their fury at that instant guides: They thrust themselues into the murthring throng, Where such bad fortune those braue Lords betides: The Admirall from off his Horse was flong, For the sterne English downe before them beere All that withstand, the Pesant and the Peere. Which when the noble Constable with griefe, Doth this great Lord vpon the ground behold; In his account so absolute a Chiefe, Whose death through France he knew would be condold, Like a braue Knight to yeeld his friend reliefe, Doing as much as possibly he could, Both horse and man is borne into the mayne, And from his friend not halfe a furlong slayne. Now Willoughby vpon his well-Armd Horse, Into the midst of this Battalion brought, And valiant Fanhope no whit lesse in force, Himselfe hath thither through the squadrons raught, Whereas the English without all remorce, Looking like men that deepely were distraught Smoking with sweat, besmeard with dust and blood, Cut into Cantels all that them withstood. Yet whilst thus hotely they hold vp the Chase Vpon the French, and had so high a hand: The Duke of Burbon to make good his place, Inforcd his troupes with much adoe to stand, To whom the Earle of Suffolke makes a pace, Bringing a fresh, and yet-vnfought-with Band: Of valiant Bill-men, Oxford with successe, Vp with his Troupes doth with the other presse. When in comes Orleance, quite thrust off before, By those rude crowdes that from the English ran, Encouraging stout Burbons Troupes the more, Taffront the Foe that instantly began: Faine would the Duke if possible restore, Doing as much as could be done by man Their Honour lost, by this their late Defeate, And caused onely, by their base Retreate. Their men at Armes their Lances closely lock One in another, and come vp so round, That by the strength and horrour of the shock, They forcd the English to forsake their ground, Shrinking no more then they had beene a Rock, Though by the Shafts receiuing many a wound, As they would showe, that they were none of those, That turnd their backs so basely to their Foes. Panting for breath, his Murrian in his hand, Woodhouse comes in as back the English beare, My Lords quoth he what now inforcd to stand, When smiling Fortune offreth vs so faire, The French lye yonder like to wreakes of sand, And you by this our glory but impaire: Or now, or neuer, your first Fight maintaine, Chatillyon and the Constable are slaine. Hand ouer head pell mell vpon them ronne, If you will proue the Masters of the day, Ferrers and Greystock haue so brauely done, That I enuie their glory, and dare say, From all the English, they the Gole haue woone; Either lets share, or theyll beare all away. This spoke, his Ax about his head he flings, And hasts away, as though his heeles had winges. The Incitation of this youthfull Knight, Besides amends for their Retrayte to make, Doth re-enforce their courage, with their might: A second Charge with speed to vndertake; Neuer before were they so mad to fight, When valiant Fanhope thus the Lords bespake, Suffolke and Oxford as braue Earles you be, Once more beare vp with Willoughby and me. Why now, me thinkst I heare braue Fanhope speake, Quoth noble Oxford, thou hast thy desire: These words of thine shall yan Battalion breake: And for my selfe I neuer will retire, Vntill our Teene vpon the French we wreake: Or in this our last enterprise expire: This spoke, their Gauntlets each doth other giue, And to the Charge as fast as they could driue. That slaughter seemd to haue but stayd for breath, To make the horrour to ensue the more: With hands besmeard with blood, when meager Death Looketh more grisly then he did before: So that each body seemd but as a sheath To put their swords in, to the Hilts in gore: As though that instant were the end of all, To fell the French, or by the French to fall. Looke how you see a field of standing Corne, When some strong winde in Summer haps to blowe, At the full height, and ready to be shorne, Rising in waues, how it doth come and goe Forward and backward, so the crowds are borne, Or as the Edie turneth in the flowe: And aboue all the Bills and Axes play, As doe the Attoms in the Sunny ray. Now with mayne blowes their Armours are vnbrasd, And as the French before the English fled, With their browne Bills their recreant backs they baste, And from their shoulders their faint Armes doe shred, One with a gleaue neere cut off by the waste, Another runnes to ground with halfe a head: Another stumbling falleth in his flight, Wanting a legge, and on his face doth light. The Dukes who found their force thus ouerthrowne, And those fewe left them ready still to route, Hauing great skill, and no lesse courage showne; Yet of their safeties much began to doubt, For hauing fewe about them of their owne, And by the English so impald about, Saw that to some one they themselues must yeeld, Or else abide the fury of the field. They put themselues on those victorious Lords, Who led the Vanguard with so good successe, Bespeaking them with honourable words, Themselues their prisoners freely and confesse, Who by the strength of their commanding swords, Could hardly saue them from the slaughtring presse, By Suffolks ayde till they away were sent, Who with a Guard conuayd them to his Tent. When as their Souldiers to eschew the sack, Gainst their owne Battell bearing in their flight, By their owne French are strongly beaten back: Lest they their Ranks, should haue disordred quight, So that those men at Armes goe all to wrack Twixt their owne friends, and those with whom they fight, Wherein disorder and destruction seemd To striue, which should the powerfullest be deemd. And whilst the Daulphine of Auerney cryes, Stay men at Armes, let Fortune doe her worst, And let that Villaine from the field that flyes By Babes yet to be borne, be euer curst: All vnder heauen that we can hope for, lyes On this dayes battell, let me be the first That turnd yee back vpon your desperate Foes, To saue our Honours, though our lyues we lose. To whom comes in the Earle of Ewe, which long Had in the Battaile ranged here and there, A thousand Bills, a thousand Bowes among, And had seene many spectakles of feare, And finding yet the Daulphins spirit so strong, By that which he had chanst from him to heare, Vpon the shoulder claps him, Prince quoth he, Since I mast fall,  let me fall with thee. Scarse had he spoke, but thEnglish them inclose, And like to Mastiues fircely on them flew, Who with like Courage strongly them oppose, When the Lord Beamont, who their Armings knewe, Their present perill to braue Suffolke shewes, Quoth hee, Lo where Dauerny are and Ewe, In this small time, who since the Field begun, Haue done as much, as can by men be done. Now slaughter cease me, if I doe not greeue, Two so braue Spirits should be vntimely slaine, Lies there no way my Lord them to releeue, And for their Ransomes two such to retaine: Quoth Suffolke, come weele hazad their repreeue, And share our Fortunes, in they goe amaine, And with such danger through the presse they wade, As of their liues but small account they made. Yet ere they through the clustred Crouds could get, Oft downe on those, trod there to death that lay, The valient Daulphin had dischargd his debt, Then whom no man had brauelier serud that day. The Earle of Ewe, and wondrous hard beset: Had left all hope of life to scape away: Till noble Beamont and braue Suffolke came, And as their prisoner seasd him by his name. Now the mayne Battaile of the French came on, The Vanward vanquisht, quite the Field doth flye, And other helpes besides this, haue they none: But that their hopes doe on their mayne relye, And therefore now it standeth them vpon, To fight it brauely, or else yeeld, or dye: For the fierce English charge so home and sore, As in their hands Ioues thunderbolts they bore. The Duke of Yorke, who since the fight begun, Still in the top of all his Troopes was seene, And things wellneere beyond beleefe had done, Which of his Fortune, made him ouerweene, Himselfe so farre into the maine doth runne, So that the French which quickly got betweene Him and his succours, that great Chiefetaine slue, Who brauely fought whilest any breath he drew. The newes soone brought to this Couragious King, Orespred his face with a distempred Fire, Though making little shew of any thing, Yet to the full his eyes exprest his Ire, More then before the Frenchmen menacing; And hee was heard thus softly to respire: Well, of thy blood reuenged will I bee, Or ere one houre be past Ile follow thee. When as the frolike Caualry of France, That in the head of the maine Battaile came, Perceiud the King of England to aduance, To Charge in person; It doth them inflame, Each one well hoping it might be his chance To sease vpon him, which was all their ayme, Then with the brauest of the English mett, Themselues that there before the King had sett. When the Earle of Cornewal with vnusuall force, Encounters Grandpre next that came to hand In Strength his equall, blow for blow they scorce, Weelding their Axes as they had beene wands, Till the Earle tumbles Grandpre from his Horse Ouer whom straight the Count Salines stands, And lendeth Cornwal such a blow withall, Ouer the Crupper that he makes him fall. Cornwal recouers, for his Armes were good, And to Salines maketh vp againe, Who changde such boysterous buffets, that the blood, Doth through the Ioints of their strong Armour straine, Till Count Salines sunck downe where he stood, Blamount who sees the Count Salines slaine, Straight copes with Cornwal beaten out of breath Till Kent comes in, and rescues him from death. Kent vpon Blamount furiously doth flye, Who at the Earle with no lesse courage struck, And one the other with such knocks they plye, That eithers Axe in thothers Helmet stuck; Whilst they are wrastling, crossing thigh with thigh; Their Axes pykes, which soonest out should pluck: They, fall to ground like in their Casks to smother, With their clutcht Gauntlets cuffing one another. Couragious Cluet grieued at the sight Of his friend Blamounts vnexpected fall, Makes in to lend him all the ayde he might; Whose comming seemd the stout Lord Scales to call, Betwixt whom then began a mortall fight, When instantly fell in Sir Phillip Hall, Gainst him goes Roussy, in then Louell ran, Whom next Count Moruyle chuseth as his man. Their Curates are vnriuetted with blowes, With horrid wounds their breasts and faces slasht; There drops a cheeke, and there falls off a nose: And in ones face his fellowes braines are dasht; Yet still the Better with the English goes; The earth of France with her owne blood is washt; They fall so fast, she scarse affords them roome, That one mans Trunke becomes anothers Toombe. When Suffolk chargeth Huntingdon with sloth, Ouer himselfe too wary to haue bin, And had neglected his fast plighted troth Vpon the Field, the Battaile to begin, That where the one was, there they would be both; When the stout Earle of Huntingdon, to win Trust with his friends; doth this himselfe enlarge To this great Earle who dares him thus to charge. My Lord quoth he it is not that I feare, More then your selfe, that so I haue not gone; But that I haue beene forced to be neare The King, whose person I attend vpon, And that I doubt not but to make appeare Now, if occasion shall but call me on, Looke round about my Lord, if you can see, Some braue aduenture worthy you and me. See yan proud Banner, of the Duke of Barres, Me thinkst it wafts vs, and I heare it say, Whers that couragious Englishman that darres, Aduenture, but to carry me away, This were a thing, now worthy of our warres; Ist true, quoth Suffolke, by this blessed day, On, and weele haue it, sayst thou so indeed, Quoth Huntingdon, then Fortune be our speed. And through the Ranckes then rushing in their pride, They make a Lane; about them so they lay, Foote goes with foote, and side is ioynde to side, They strike downe all that stand within their way, And to direct them, haue no other guide, But as they see the multitude to sway; And as they passe, the French as to defie, Saint George for England and the King they cry. By their examples, each braue English blood, Vpon the Frenchmen for their Ensignes runne, Thick there as trees within a well-growne wood; Where great Atchiements instantly were done, Against them toughly whilst that Nation stood, But  what man his destinie can shunne That Noble Suffolke there is ouerthrowne, When he much valour sundry wayes hath showne. Which the proud English further doth prouoke, Who to destruction bodily were bent, That the maine Battaile instantly they broke, Vpon the French so furiously they went And not an English but doth scorne a stroake, If to the ground it not a Frenchman sent, Who weake with wounds, their weapons from them threw, With which the English fearefully them slue. Alanzon backe vpon the Reareward borne, By those vnarmd that from the English fled, All further hopes then vtterly forlorne, His Noble heart in his full Bosome bled; What Fate, quoth he, our ouerthrowe hath sworne, Must France a Prisoner be to England led, Well, if she be so, yet Ile let her see, She beares my Carkasse with her, and not me. And puts his Horse vpon his full Careere, When with the courage of a valiant Knight As one that knew not, or forgot to feare He towrds King Henry maketh in the fight, And all before him as he downe doth beare, Vpon the Duke of Glocester doth light: Which on the youthfull Chiualry doth bring, Scarse two Pykes length that came before the King. Their Staues both strongly riuetted with steele, At the first stroke each other they astound, That as they staggering from each other reele; The Duke of Gloster falleth to the ground: When as Alanzon round about doth wheele, Thinking to lend him his last deadly wound: In comes the King his Brothers life to saue And to this braue Duke, a fresh on-set gaue. When as themselues like Thunderbolts they shot, One at the other, and the Lightning brake Out of their Helmets, and againe was not, Er of their strokes, the eare a sound could take Betwixt them two, the Conflict grew so hot, Which those about them so amazd doth make, That they stood still as wondring at the sight, And quite forgot that they themselues must fight. Vpon the King Alanzon prest so sore, That with a stroke as he was wondrous strong He cleft the Crowne that on his Helme he wore, And tore his Plume that to his heeles it hong: Then with a second brusd his Helme before, That it his forehead pittifully wroong: As some that sawe it certainly had thought, The King therewith had to the ground beene brought. But Henry soone Alanzons Ire to quit, As now his valour lay vpon the Rack Vpon the face the Duke so strongly hit, As in his Saddle layde him on his back, And once perceiuing that he had him split, Followd his blowes, redoubling thwack on thwack: Till he had lost his Stirups, and his head Hung where his Horse was like thereon to tread. When soone two other seconding their Lord, His kind Companions in this glorious prize, Hoping againe the Duke to haue restord, If to his feet his Armes would let him rise: On the Kings Helme their height of fury scord; Who like a Dragon fiercely on them flies, And on his body slew them both, whilst he Recouering was their ayde againe to be. The King thus made the Master of the Fight: The Duke calls to him as he there doth lye: Henry Ile pay my Ransome, doe me right: The King to saue him putting all his might, Yet the rude Souldiers, with their showt and crie, Quite drownd his voyce, his Helmet being shut, And, that braue Duke into small peeces cut. Report once spred, through the distracted Host, Of their prime hope, the Duke Alanzon slayne: That flower of France, on whom they trusted most: They found their valour was but then in vayne: Like men their hearts that vtterly had lost, Who slowly fled before, now ranne amayne. Nor could a man be found, but that dispaires Seeing the Fate both of themselues and theirs. The Duke Neuers, now in this sad retreat, By Dauid Gam and Morisby persude, Who throughly chafd, neere melted into sweat, And with French blood their Poleaxes imbrud They sease vpon him following the defeate, Amongst the faint, and fearefull multitude; When a contention fell betweene them twaine, To whom the Duke should rightfully pertaine. I must confesse thou hadst him first in chase, Quoth Morrisby; but lefts him in the throng, Then put I on; quoth Gam, hast thou the face, Insulting Knight, to offer me this wrong; Quoth Morrisby, who shall decide the case, Let him confesse to whom he doth belong; Let him quoth Gam but ift be not to me, For any right you haue, he may goe free. With that couragious Morrisby grew hot, Were not said he his Ransome worth a pin, Now by these Armes I weare thou gettst him not: Or if thou dost, thou shalt him hardly win; Gam whose Welch blood could hardly brooke this blot, To bend his Axe vpon him doth begin: He his at him, till the Lord Beamount came Their rash attempt, and wisely thus doth blame. Are not the French twice trebld to our power, And fighting still, nay, doubtfull yet the day: Thinke you not these vs fast enough deuoure: But that your braues the Army must dismay: If ought but good befell vs in this howre: This be you sure your lyues for it must pay: Then first the end of this dayes Battaile see, And then decide whose prisoner he shall be. Now Excester with his vntaynted Reare Came on, which long had labourd to come in: And with the Kings mayne Battell vp doth beare; Who still kept off, till the last houre had bin: He cryes and clamours eury way doth heare: But yet he knew not which the day should win: Nor askes of any what were fit to doe, But where the French were thickst, he falleth to. The Earle of Vandom certainly that thought, The English fury somewhat had beene stayde: Weary with slaughter as men ouer-wrought, Nor had beene spurrd on by a second ayde: For his owne safety, then more fiercely fought, Hoping the tempest somewhat had been layde: And he thereby though suffring the defeate, Might keep his Reareward whole in his Retreate. On whom the Duke of Excester then fell, Reare with the Reare now for their Valours vy, Ours finde the French their lyues will dearely sell; And thEnglish meane as dearely them to buy: The English follow, should they runne through hell, And through the same the French must, if they flye, When toot they goe, deciding it with blowes, With thone side now, then with thothert goes. But the sterne English with such luck and might, As though the Fates had sworne to take their parts Vpon the French preuailing in the Fight, With doubled hands, and with re-doubled harts, The more in perill still the more in plight, Gainst them whom Fortune miserably thwarts: Disabled quite before the Foe to stand, But fall like grasse before the Mowers hand. That this French Earle is beaten on the Field, His fighting Souldiers round about him slaine; And when himselfe a Prisoner he would yeeld, And begd for life, it was but all in vaine; Their Bills the English doe so easely weeld To kill the French, as though it were no paine; For this to them was their auspicious day, The more the English fight, the more they may. When now the Marshall Boucequalt, which long Had through the Battaile waded eury way, Oft hazarded the murtherd Troupes among, Encouraging them to abide the day: Finding the Army that he thought so strong, Before the English faintly to dismay, Brings on the wings which of the rest remaind, With which the Battaile stoutly he maintaind. Till olde Sir Thomas Erpingham at last, With those three hundred Archers commeth in, Which layd in ambush not three houres yet past; Had the Defeat of the French Army bin, With these that noble Souldier maketh hast, Lest other from him should the honour win: Who as before now stretch their well-waxd strings, At the French Horse then comming in the wings. The soyle with slaughter eury where they load, Whilst the French stoutly to the English stood, The drops from eithers emptied veynes that flowd, Where it was lately firme had made a flood: But heaun that day to the braue English owd; The Sunne that rose in water, set in blood: Nothing but horrour to be lookd for there, And the stout Marshall vainely doth but feare. His Horse sore wounded whilst he went aside, To take another still that doth attend, A shaft which some too-lucky hand doth guide, Peircing his Gorget brought him to his end; Which when the proud Lord Falkonbridge espide, Thinking from thence to beare away his friend, Strucke from his Horse, with many a mortall wound, Is by the English nayled to the ground. The Marshalls death so much doth them affright, That downe their weapons instantly they lay, And better yet to fit them for their flight, Their weightier Armes, they wholly cast away, Their hearts so heauy, makes their heeles so light, That there was no intreating them to stay, Ore hedge and ditch distractedly they take, And happiest he, that greatest haste could make. When Vadamount now in the Conflict mett, With valient Brabant, whose high valour showne That day, did many a blunted Courage whett, Else long before that from the Field had flowne, Quoth Vadamount, see how we are besett, To death like to be troden by our owne, My Lord of Brabant, what is to be done? See how the French before the English runne. Why, let them runne and neuer turne the head, Quoth the braue Duke, vntill their hatefull breath Forsake their Bodies, and so farre haue fled, That France be not disparadgd by their death: Who trusts to Cowards ner is better sped, Be he accurst, with such that holdeth faith, Slaughter consume the Recreants as they flye, Branded with shame, so basely may they dye. Ignoble French, your fainting Cowardize craues The dreadfull curse of your owne Mother earth, Hardning her breast, not to allow you graues, Be she so much ashamed of your birth; May he be curst that one of you but saues, And be in France hereafter such a dearth Of Courage, that men from their wits it feare, A Drumme, or Trumpet when they hap to heare. From Burgundy brought I the force I had, To fight for them, that ten from one doe flye; It splits my breast, O that I could be mad; To vexe these Slaues who would not dare to dye: In all this Army is there not a Lad, Thignoble French for Cowards that dare crye: If scarse one found, then let me be that one, The English Army that opposd alone. This said, he puts his Horse vpon his speed, And in, like lightning on the English flewe: Where many a Mothers sonne he made to bleed, Whilst him with much astonishment they viewe: Where hauing acted many a Knight-like deed, Him and his Horse they all to peeces hewe: Yet he that day more lasting glory wan, Except Alanzon then did any man. When as report to great King Henry came, Of a vast Route which from the Battaile fled, Amongst the French most men of speciall name By the stout English fiercely followed; Had for their safety, much though to their shame Got in their flight into so strong a sted, So fortifid by nature as twas thought They might not thence, but with much blood be brought. An aged Rampire, with huge Ruines heapt, Which serud for Shot, gainst those that should assayle, Whose narrow entrance they with Crosbowes kept, Whose sharpned quarres came in showrs like hayle: Quoth the braue King, first let the field be swept, And with the rest we well enough shall deale; Which though some heard, and so shut vp their eare, Yet relishd not with many Souldiers there. Some that themselues by Ransomes would enrich, To make their pray of Pesants yet dispise Felt as they thought their bloody palmes to itch, To be in action for their wealthy prize: Others whom onely glory doth bewitch, Rather then life would to this enterprize: Most men seemd willing, yet not any one Would put himselfe this great exployt vpon. Which Woodhouse hearing meerily thus spake, One that right well knew, both his worth and wit A dangerous thing it is to vndertake A Fort, where Souldiers be defending it, Perhaps they sleepe, and if they should awake, With stones, or with their shafts they may vs hitt, And in our Conquest whilst so well we fare, It were meere folly, but I see none dare. Which Gam or hearing being neere at hand Not dare quoth he, and angerly doth frowne, I tell thee Woodhouse, some in presence stand, Dare propp the Sunne if it were falling downe, Dare graspe the bolt from Thunder in his hand, And through a Cannon leape into a Towne; I tell thee, a resolued man may doe Things, that thy thoughts, yet neuer mounted to. I know that resolution may doe much, Woodhouse replyes, but who could act my thought, With his proud head the Pole might easely tuch, And Gam quoth he, though brauely thou hast fought, Yet not the fame thou hast attaind too, such, But that behind, as great is to be bought, And yonder tis, then Gam come vp with me, Where soone the King our Courages shall see. Agreed quoth Gam, and vp their Troopes they call, Hand ouer head, and on the French they ran, And to the fight couragiously they fall, When on both sides the slaughter soone began; Fortune awhile indifferent is to all, These what they may, and those doe what they can. Woodhouse and Gam, vpon each other vye, By Armes their manhood desperatly to try. To clime the Fort the Light-Armd English striue, And some by Trees there growing to ascend; The French with Flints let at the English driue, Themselues with Shields the Englishmen defend, And faine the Fort downe with their hands would riue: Thus either side their vtmost power extend, Till valiant Gam sore wounded, drawne aside By his owne Souldiers, shortly after dyde. Then take they vp the bodies of the slaine, Which for their Targets ours before them beare, And with a fresh assault come on againe; Scarse in the Field yet, such a fight as there, Crosse-bowes, and Long-bowes at it are amaine, Vntil the French their massacre that feare, Of the fierce English, a cessation craue, Offring to yeeld, so they their liues would saue. Lewis of Burbon in the furious heat Of this great Battaile, hauing made some stay, Who with the left wing suffered a defeate, In the beginning of this lucklesse day, Finding the English forcing their retreat, And that much hope vpon his valour lay, Fearing lest he might vndergoe some shame, That were vnworthy of the Burbon name. Hath gathered vp some scattred Troopes of Horse, That in the Field stood doubtfull what to doe; Though with much toyle, which he doth reinforce With some small power that he doth add thereto, Proclaiming still the English had the worse, And now at last, with him if they would goe, He dares assure them Victory, if not The greatest fame that euer Souldiers gott. And being wise, so Burbon to beguile The French, preparing instantly to fly Procures a Souldier, by a secret wile To come in swiftly and to craue supply, That if with Courage they would fight awhile, It certaine was the English all should dye, For that the King had offered them to yeeld, Finding his troopes to leaue him on the Field. When Arthur Earle of Richmount comming in, With the right wing that long staid out of sight, Hauing too lately with the English bin, But finding Burbon bent againe to fight, His former credit hoping yet to winn, Which at that instant easily he might Comes close vp with him, and puts on as fast, Brauely resolud to fight it to the last. And both encouragd by the newes was braught Of the ariuing of the Daulphins power; Whose speedy Van, their Reare had almost raught, From Agincourt discouerd from a Tower Which with the Norman Gallantry was fraught, And on the suddaine comming like a shower; Would bring a deluge on the English Host, Whilst they yet stood their victory to boast. And one they come, as doth a rowling tide, Forcd by a winde, that shoues it forth so fast, Till it choke vp some chanell side to side, And the crazd banks doth downe before it cast, Hoping the English would them not abide, Or would be so amazed at their hast, That should they faile to route them at their will, Yet of their blood, the fields should drinke their fill. When as the English whose or-wearied Armes, Were with long slaughter lately waxed sore, These inexpected, and so fierce Alarmes, To their first strength doe instantly restore, And like a Stoue their stifned sinewes warmes, To act as brauely as they did before; And the proud French as stoutly to oppose, Scorning to yeeld one foot despight of blowes. The fight is fearefull, for stout Burbon brings His fresher forces on with such a shocke, That they were like to cut the Archers strings Ere they their Arrowes hansomly could nock The French like Engines that were made with springs: Themselues so fast into the English lock, That thone was like the other downe to beare, In wanting roomth to strike, they stoode so neare. Still staggering long they from each other reeld, Glad that themselues they so could disingage: And falling back vpon the spacious field For this last Sceane, that is the bloody Stage Where they their Weapons liberally could weeld, They with such madnesse execute their rage; As though the former fury of the day, To this encounter had but beene a play. Slaughter is now desected to the full, Here from their backs their batterd Armours fall, Here a sleft shoulder, there a clouen scull, There hang his eyes out beaten with a mall, Vntill the edges of their Bills growe dull, Vpon each other they so spend their gall, Wilde showtes and clamors all the ayre doe fill, The French cry tue , and the English kill. The Duke of Barre in this vaste spoyle by chance; With the Lord Saint-Iohn on the Field doth meete, Towards whom that braue Duke doth himselfe aduance, Who with the like encounter him doth greete: This English Barron, and this Peere of France, Grapling together, falling from their feete, With the rude crowdes had both to death beene crusht, In for their safety, had their friends not rusht. Both againe raisd, and both their Souldiers shift, To saue their lyues if any way they could: But as the French the Duke away would lift, Vpon his Armes the English taking hould, Men of that sort, that thought vpon their thrift Knowing his Ransome dearely would be sould: Dragge him away in spight of their defence, Which to their Quarter would haue borne him thence. Meane while braue Burbon from his stirring Horse, Galld with an Arrow to the earth is throwne; By a meane Souldier seased on by force, Hoping to haue him certainly his owne, Which this Lord holdeth better so then worse: Since the French fortune to that ebbe is growne, And he perceiues the Souldier him doth deeme, To be a person of no meane esteeme. Berckley and Burnell, two braue English Lords, Flesht with French blood, and in their Valours pride, Aboue their Armd heads brandishing their swords, As they tryumphing through the Army ride, Finding what prizes Fortune here affords To eury Souldier, and more wistly eyde This gallant prisoner, by his Arming see, Of the great Burbon family to be. And from the Souldier they his Prisoner take, Of which the French Lord seemeth wondrous faine Thereby his safety more secure to make: Which when the Souldier findes his hopes in vaine, So rich a Booty forced to forsake, To put himselfe, and prisoner out of paine: He on the suddaine stabs him, and doth sweare, Would thaue his Ransome, they should take it there. When Rosse and Morley making in amaine, Bring the Lord Darcy vp with them along, Whose Horse had lately vnder him beene slaine; And they on foote found fighting in the throng, Those Lords his friends remounting him againe, Being a man that valiant was and strong: They altogether with a generall hand, Charge on the French that they could finde to stand. And yet but vainely as the French supposd, For thEarle of Richmount forth such earth had found, That one two sides with quick-set was enclosd, And the way to it by a rising ground, By which a while the English were opposd, At euery Charge which else came vp so round, As that except the passage put them by, The French as well might leaue their Armes and flye. Vpon both parts it furiously is fought, And with such quicknesse riseth to that hight, That horror neede no further to be sought: If onely that might satisfie the sight, Who would haue fame full dearely here it bought, For it was sold by measure and by waight, And at one rate the price still certaine stood, An ounce of honour cost a pound of blood. When so it hapt that Dampier in the Van, Meetes with stout Darcy, but whilst him he prest, Ouer and ouer commeth horse and man, Of whom the other soone himselfe possest: When as Sauesses vpon Darcy ran To ayde Dampier, but as he him adrest; A Halbert taking hold vpon his Greaues, Him from his Saddle violently heaues. When soone fiue hundred Englishmen at Armes, That to the French had giuen many a chase; And when they couered all the Field with swarmes; Yet oft that day had brauely bid them base: Now at the last by raising fresh Alarmes; And comming vp with an vnusuall pace, Made them to knowe, that they must runne or yeeld, Neuer till now the English had the Field. Where Arthur Earle of Richmount beaten downe, Is left supposd of eury one for dead But afterwards awaking from his swoone, By some that found him, was recouered: So Count Du Marle was likewise ouerthrowne: As he was turning meaning to haue fled, Who fights, the colde blade in his bosome feeles, Who flyes, still heares it whisking at his heeles. Till all disrankd, like seely Sheepe they runne, By threats nor prayers, to be constraind to stay; For that their hearts were so extreamely done, That fainting oft they fall vpon the way: Or when they might a present perill shunne, They rush vpon it by their much dismay, That from the English should they safely flye, Of their owne very feare, yet they should dye. Some they take prisoners, other some they kill, As they affect those vpon whom they fall: For they as Victors may doe what they will: For who this Conqueror to account dare call, In gore the English seeme their soules to swill, And the deiected French must suffer all; Flight, cords, and slaughter, are the onely three, To which themselues subiected they doe see. A shoolesse Souldier there a man might meete, Leading his Mounsier by the armes fast bound: Another, his had shackled by the feete; Who like a Cripple shuffled on the ground; Another three or foure before him beete, Like harmefull Chattell driuen to a pound; They must abide it, so the Victor will, Who at his pleasure may, or saue, or kill. That braue French Gallant, when the fight began, Who lease of Lackies ambled by his side, Himselfe a Lacky now most basely ran, Whilst a ragd Souldier on his Horse doth ride, That Rascall is no lesse then at his man, Who was but lately to his Luggadge tide; And the French Lord now courtsies to that slaue, Who the last day his Almes was like to craue. And those few English wounded in the fight, They force the French to bring with them away, Who when they were depressed with the weight, Yet dard not once their burthen downe to lay, Those in the morne, whose hopes were at their height, Are fallne thus lowe ere the departing day; With pickes of Halberts prickt in steed of goads, Like tyred Horses labouring with their Loads. But as the English from the Field returne, Some of those French who when the Fight began, Forsooke their friends, and hoping yet to earne, Pardon, for that so cowardly they ran, Assay the English Carridges to burne, Which to defend them scarsely had a man; For that their keepers to the field were got, To picke such spoyles, as chance should them alott. The Captaines of this Rascall cowardly Route, Were Isambert of Agincourt at hand, Riflant of Clunasse a Dorpe there about, And for the Chiefe in this their base command, Was Robinett of Burnivile; throughout The Countrie knowne, all order to withstand, These with fiue hundred Peasants they had raisd The English Tents, vpon an instant seasd. For setting on those with the Luggadge left, A few poore Sutlers with the Campe that went, They basely fell to pillage and to theft, And hauing rifled euery Booth and Tent, Some of the sillyest they of life bereft, The feare of which, some of the other sent, Into the Army, with their suddaine cries, Which put the King in feare of fresh supplies. For that his Souldiers tyred in the fight, Their Prisoners more in number then they were, He thought it for a thing of too much weight, Toppose freshe forces, and to guard them there. The Daulphins Powers, yet standing in their sight, And Burbons Forces of the field not cleere. These yearning cryes, that from the Caridge came, His bloud yet hott, more highly doth inflame And in his rage he instantly commands, That euery English should his prisoner kill, Except some fewe in some great Captaines hands Whose Ransomes might his emptyed Cofers fill, Alls one whose loose, or who is nowe in bonds, Both must one way, it is the Conquerers will. Those who late thought, small Ransoms them might free Saw onely death their Ransomes now must be. Accursed French, and could it not suffize, That ye but now bathd in your natiue gore; But yee must thus infortunately rise, To drawe more plagues vpon yee then before, And gainst your selfe more mischeife to diuise, Then thEnglish could haue, and set wide the dore. To vtter ruine, and to make an end Of that your selues, which others would not spend. Their vtmost rage the English now had breathd, And their proud heartes gan somewhat to relent, Their bloody swords they quietly had sheathd, And their strong bowes already were vnbent, To easefull rest their bodies they bequeathd, Nor farther harme at all to you they ment, And to that paynes must yee them needsly putt, To draw their kniues once more your throats to cutt. That French who lately by the English stood, And freely askd what ransome he should pay, Whoe somwhat coold, and in a calmer moode, Agreed with him both of the some and day, Nowe findes his flesh must be the present foode, For wolues and Rauens, for the same that stay. And sees his blood on thothers sword to flowe, Er his quicke sense could aprehend the blowe. Whilst one is asking what the busnesse is, Hearing in French his Country-man to crye: He who detaines him prisoner, answers this: Mounsier, the King commands that you must dye; This is plaine English, whilst hes killing his: He sees another on a French man flye, And with a Poleax pasheth out his braines, Whilst hes demanding what the Garboyle meanes. That tender heart whose chance it was to haue, Some one, that day who did much valour showe, Who might perhaps haue had him for his Slaue: But equall Lots had Fate pleasd to bestowe: He who his prisoner willingly would saue, Lastly constraind to giue the deadly blowe That sends him downe to euerlasting sleepe: Turning his face, full bitterly doth weepe. Ten thousand French that inwardly were well, Saue some light hurts that any man might heale: Euen at an instant, in a minute fell, And their owne friends their deathes to them to deale. Yet of so many, very fewe could tell, Nor could the English perfectly reueale, The desperate cause of this disastrous hap, That euen as Thunder killd them with a clap. How happy were those in the very hight, Of this great Battaile, that had brauely dyde, When as their boyling bosomes in the fight, Felt not the sharpe steele thorough them to slide: But these now in a miserable plight, Must in cold blood this massacre abide, Causd by those Villaines curst aliue and dead, That from the field the passed morning fled. When as the King to Crowne this glorious day, Now bids his Souldiers after all this toyle, No forces found that more might them dismay Of the dead French to take the genrall spoyle, Whose heapes had well neere stopt vp eury way; For eun as Clods they coured all the soyle, Commanding none should any one controle, Catch that catch might, but each man to his dole. They fall to groping busily for gold, Of which about them the slaine French had store, They finde as much as well their hands can hold, Who had but siluer, him they counted poore, Scarfes, Chaines, and Bracelets, were not to be told, So rich as these no Souldiers were before; Who got a Ring would scarsly put it on, Except therein there were some Radiant stone. Out of rich sutes the Noblest French they strip, And leaue their Bodies naked on the ground, And each one fills his Knapsack or his Scrip; With some rare thing that on the Field is found: About his busnesse he doth nimbly skip, That had vpon him many a cruell wound: And where they found a French not out-right slaine, They him a prisoner constantly retaine. Who scarse a Shirt had but the day before, Nor a whole Stocking to keepe out the cold, Hath a whole Wardrop at command in store In the French fashion flaunting it in gold, And in the Tauerne, in his Cups doth rore, Chocking his Crownes, and growes thereby so bold, That proudly he a Captaines name assumes, In his gilt Gorget with his tossing Plumes. Waggons and Carts are laden till they crackt, With Armes and Tents there taken in the Field; For want of carridge on whose tops are packt, Nor neede they conuoy, fearing to be sackt; For all the Country to King Henry yeelds, And the poore Pesant helpes along to beare, What late the goods of his proud Landlord were. A Horse well furnisht for a present Warre: For a French Crowne might any where be bought, But if so be that he had any scarre, Though ner so small, he valewd was at naught; With spoyles so sated the proud English are; Amongst the slaine, that who for pillage sought, Except some rich Caparizon he found, For a steele Saddle would not stoupe to ground. And many a hundred beaten downe that were, Whose wounds were mortall, others wondrous deepe, When as the English ouer-past they heare: And no man left a Watch on them to keepe, Into the Bushes, and the Ditches neare, Vpon their weake hands and their knees doe creepe: But for their hurts tooke ayre, and were vndrest, They were found dead, and buried with the rest. Thus when the King sawe that the Coast was cleard, And of the French who were not slaine were fled: Nor in the Field not any then appeard, That had the power againe to make a head: This Conquerour exceedingly is cheerd, Thanking his God that he so well had sped, And so towrds Callice brauely marching on, Leaueth sad France her losses to bemoane. Fayre stood the winde for France, When we our sailes aduance, Nor now to proue our chance Longer not tarry, But put vnto the mayne: At Kaux, the mouth of Seine, With all his warlike trayne And taking many a forte, Furnishd in warlike sorte, Comming toward Agincourte In happy houre With those oppose his way, Whereas the Genrall laye With all his powre. Which in his height of pride, As Henry to deride, His ransome to prouide Vnto him sending; Which he neglects the while, As from a nation vyle, Yet with an angry smile Their fall portending. And turning to his men, Quoth famous Henry then, Though they to one be ten, Be not amazed: Yet haue we well begun; Battailes so brauely wonne Euermore to the sonne By fame are raysed. And for my selfe, quoth hee This my full rest shall bee, England nere mourne for me, Nor more esteeme me: Victor I will remaine, Or on this earth be slaine; Neuer shall she sustaine Losse to redeeme me. Poiters and Cressy tell, When moste their pride did swell, Vnder our swords they fell: Ne lesse our skill is, Then when our grandsyre greate, Claiming the regall seate, In many a warlike feate Lopd the French lillies. The Duke of Yorke soe dread The eager vaward led; With the maine Henry sped Amongst his hench men. Excester had the rear, A brauer man not there. And now preparing were For the false Frenchmen And ready to be gone. Armour on armour shone, Drum vnto drum did grone, To hear was woonder; That with the cries they make The very earth did shake: Trumpet to trumpet spake, Thunder to thunder. Well it thine age became, O, noble Erpingham! That didst the signall frame Vnto the forces; When from a medow by, Like a storme, sodainely The English archery Stuck the French horses. The Spanish vghe so strong, Arrowes a cloth-yard long, That like to serpents stoong, Piercing the wether: None from his death now starts, But playing manly parts, And like true English harts Stuck close together. When down theyr bowes they threw, And foorth theyr bilbowes drewe, And on the French they flew, Arms from the shoulders sent, Scalpes to the teeth were rent; Downe the French pesants went These were men hardye. When now that noble King, His broade sword brandishing, Into the hoast did fling, As to orwhelme it; Who many a deep wound lent, His armes with blood besprent, And many a cruell dent Brused his helmett. Gloster that Duke so good, Next of the royall blood, For famous England stood With his braue brother: Clarence in steele most bright, That yet a maiden knighte, Yet in this furious fighte Scarce such an other. Warwick in bloode did wade, Oxford the foes inuade, And cruel slaughter made Still as they ran vp: Suffolk his axe did ply, Bare them right doughtyly, On happy Cryspin day Fought was this noble fray, Which fame did not delay To England to carry. O! when shall Englishmen With such acts fill a pen, Or England breed agen If it pass against us We lose the better half of our possession. This would drink deep. Twould drink the cup and all. Ile send him Balls and Rackets if I liue That they such Racket shall in Paris see, When ouer lyne with Bandies I shall driue, As that before the Set be fully done, France may perhaps into the Hazard runne. Play with your fancies, and in them behold Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing; Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give To sounds confused; behold the threaden sails, Borne with the invisible and creeping wind, Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea. To-night in Harfleur will we be your guest, To-morrow for the march are we addrest. Not to-day, O Lord, O, not to-day, think not upon the fault My father made in compassing the crown! I Richards body have interred new: And on it have bestowed more contrite tears Than from it issued forced drops of blood: Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay, Who twice a day their withered hands hold up Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and I have built Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests Sing still for Richards soul. More will I do; Though all that I can do is nothing worth, Since that my penitence comes after all, Imploring pardon. For he this day that sheds his blood with me Shall be my brother; be he neer so vile This day shall gentle his condition Let the brow oerwhelm it As fearfully as doth a galled rock Oerhang and jutty his confounded base, Swilld with the wild and wasteful ocean. I was not angry since I came to France Until this instant. Charitable licence, That we may wander oer this bloody field To book our dead, and then to bury them. Sown in a wrinkle of the monstrous hill, The city sparkles like a grain of salt. The mightie Giant-heape so less and lesser still Appeareth to the eye, untill the monstrous hill At length shewes like a cloud; and further being cast, Is out of kenning quite. While on her hearth lay blazing many a piece Of sandal wood, rare gems, and cinnamon. Men scarcely know how beautiful fire is; Each flame of it is as a precious stone Dissolved in ever-moving light, and this Belongs to each and all who gaze thereon. The Fire of precious Wood, the Light Perfume Which left a sweetnesse on each thing it shone, As every thing did to it selfe assume The Sent from them and made the same their owne So that the painted Flowres within the Roome Were sweet, as if they naturally had growne; The Light gave Colours, which upon them fell, And to the Colours the Perfume gave smell. As our King lay musing on his bed, He bethought himself upon a time, Of a tribute that was due from France, Had not been paid for so long a time. He called for his lovely page, His lovely page then called he; Saying, You must go to the King of France, To the King of France, sir, ride speedily. O then went away this lovely page, This lovely page then away went he; Low he came to the King of France, And then fell down on his bended knee. My master greets you, worthy sir, Ten ton of Gold that is due to he, That you will send his tribute home, Or in French land you soon him will see. Your masters young and of tender years, Not fit to come into my degree, And I will send him three Tennis-Balls That with them he may learn to play. O then returned this lovely page, This lovely page then returned he, And when he came to our gracious King, Low he fell down on his bended knee. What is the news you have brought to me? I have brought such news from the King of France That he and you will neer agree. He says, Youre young and of tender years, Not fit to come to his degree; And he will send you three Tennis-Balls That with them you may learn to play. And Derby Hills that are so free; No marryd man, or widows son, For no widows curse shall go with me. They recruited Cheshire and Lancashire, And Derby Hills that are so free; No marryd man, nor no widows son, Yet there was a jovial bold company. O then we marchd into the French land With drums and trumpets so merrily; And then bespoke the King of France, Lo yonder comes proud King Henry. The first shot that the Frenchmen gave They killd our Englishmen so free, We killd ten thousand of the French, And the rest of them they run away. And then we marched to Paris gates, With drums and trumpets so merrily, O then bespoke the King of France, The Lord have mercy on my men and me. O I will send him his tribute home, Ten ton of Gold that is due to he, And the finest flower that is in all France, To the Rose of England I will give free. when this juggling fate Of soldiery first seiz'd me. that day, when we Left craggy Biston and the fatal Dee. O that day When like the fathers in the fire and cloud I miss'd thy face! I might in ev'ry crowd See arms like thine, and men advance, but none So near to lightning mov'd, nor so fell on. Have you observ'd how soon the nimble eye Brings th' object to conceit, and doth so vie Performance with the soul, that you would swear The act and apprehension both lodg'd there? Just so mov'd he: like shot his active hand Drew blood, ere well the foe could understand. But here I lost him. His present place in which he doth abide I know not, for the world he walks about, Of which he is a citizen; this tide He is to visit artists and seek out Antiquities a voyage gone and will Return when he of travel hath his fill. By nation an Englishman, of note His family is in the place where he Was born, his fortune's good, and eke his coat Of arms is of a great antiquity; His learning rare, his years scarce thirty-three; Fuller description get you not from me. Who judged of Nature when he did not know her; When we are dead, and now, no more Our harmless mirth, our wit, and score Distracts the town; when all is spent Thy purse, or mine; when the loath'd noise Of drawers, 'prentices and boys Hath left us, and the clam'rous bar Items no pints i' th' Moon or Star; When no calm whisp'rers wait the doors, To fright us with forgotten scores; And such aged long bills carry, As might start an antiquary; When the sad tumults of the maze, Arrests, suits, and the dreadful face Of sergeants are not seen, and we No lawyers' ruffs, or gowns must fee: When all these mulcts are paid, and I From thee, dear wit, must part, and die; We'll beg the world would be so kind, To give's one grave as we'd one mind; There, as the wiser few suspect, That spirits after death affect, Our souls shall meet, and thence will they, Freed from the tyranny of clay, With equal wings, and ancient love Into the Elysian fields remove, Where in those blessd walks they'll find More of thy genius, and my mind. First, in the shade of his own bays, Great Ben they'll see, whose sacred lays The learnd ghosts admire, and throng To catch the subject of his song. Then Randolph in those holy meads, His Lovers and Amyntas reads, Whilst his Nightingale, close by, Sings his and her own elegy. From thence dismiss'd, by subtle roads, Through airy paths and sad abodes, They'll come into the drowsy fields Of Lethe, which such virtue yields, That, if what poets sing be true, The streams all sorrow can subdue. Here, on a silent, shady green, The souls of lovers oft are seen, Who, in their life's unhappy space, Were murder'd by some perjur'd face. All these th' enchanted streams frequent, To drown their cares, and discontent, That th' inconstant, cruel sex Might not in death their spirits vex. And here our souls, big with delight Of their new state, will cease their flight: And now the last thoughts will appear, They'll have of us, or any here; But on those flow'ry banks will stay, And drink all sense and cares away. So they that did of these discuss, Shall find their fables true in us. Tyrant, farewell! this heart, the prize And triumph of thy scornful eyes, I sacrifice to heaven, and give To quit my sins, that durst believe A woman's easy faith, and place True joys in a changing face. Yet ere I go: by all those tears And sighs I spent 'twixt hopes and fears; By thy own glories, and that hour Which first enslav'd me to thy power; I beg, fair one, by this last breath, This tribute from thee after death. If, when I'm gone, you chance to see That cold bed where I lodgd be, Let not your hate in death appear, But bless my ashes with a tear: This influx from that quick'ning eye, By secret pow'r, which none can spy, The cold dust shall inform, and make Those flames, though dead, new life partake Whose warmth, help'd by your tears, shall bring O'er all the tomb a sudden spring Of crimson flowers, whose drooping heads Shall curtain o'er their mournful beds: And on each leaf, by Heaven's command, These emblems to the life shall stand Two hearts, the first a shaft withstood; The second, shot and wash'd in blood; And on this heart a dew shall stay, Which no heat can court away; But fix'd for ever, witness bears That hearty sorrow feeds on tears. Thus Heaven can make it known, and true That you kill'd me, 'cause I lov'd you. Nimble sigh, on thy warm wings, Take this message and depart; Tell Amoret, that smiles and sings, At what thy airy voyage brings, That thou cam'st lately from my heart. Tell my lovely foe that I Have no more such spies to send, But one or two that I intend, Some few minutes ere I die, To her white bosom to commend. Then whisper by that holy spring, Where for her sake I would have died, Whilst those water-nymphs did bring Flowers to cure what she had tried; And of my faith and love did sing. In after-times would have it read, How her beauty murder'd me, With all my heart I will agree, If she'll but love me, being dead. Ask, lover, ere thou diest; let one poor breath Steal from thy lips, to tell her of thy death; Doating idolater! can silence bring Thy saint propitious? or will Cupid fling One arrow for thy paleness? leave to try This silent courtship of a sickly eye. Witty to tyranny, she too well knows This but the incense of thy private vows, That breaks forth at thine eyes, and doth betray The sacrifice thy wounded heart would pay; Ask her, fool, ask her; if words cannot move, The language of thy tears may make her love. Flow nimbly from me then; and when you fall On her breast's warmer snow, O may you all, By some strange fate fix'd there, distinctly lie, The much lov'd volume of my tragedy. Where, if you win her not, may this be read, The cold that freez'd you so, did strike me dead. Amyntas go, thou art undone, Thy faithful heart is cross'd by fate; That love is better not begun, Where love is come to love too late. Had she professd hidden fires, Or show'd one knot that tied her heart, I could have quench'd my first desires, And we had only met to part. But, tyrant, thus to murder men, And shed a lover's harmless blood, And burn him in those flames again, Which he at first might have withstood. Yet, who that saw fair Chloris weep Such sacred dew, with such pure grace; Durst think them feignd tears, or seek For treason in an angel's face. This is her art, though this be true, Men's joys are kill'd with griefs and fears, Yet she, like flowers oppress'd with dew, Doth thrive and flourish in her tears. This, cruel, thou hast done, and thus That face hath many servants slain, Though th' end be not to ruin us, But to seek glory by our pain. Whose pure offering comes too late. profess'd her. Your aime is sure to ruine us. Seeking your glory by our paine If, Amoret, that glorious eye, In the first birth of light, And death of Night, Had with those elder fires you spy Scatter'd so high, Receivd form and sight; We might suspect in the vast ring, Amidst these golden glories, And fiery stories; Whether the sun had been the king And guide of day, Or your brighter eye should sway. But, Amoret, such is my fate, That if thy face a star Had shin'd from far, I am persuaded in that state, 'Twixt thee and me, Of some predestin'd sympathy. For sure such two conspiring minds, Which no accident, or sight, Did thus unite; Whom no distance can confine, Start, or decline, One for another were design'd. We may suspect in the vast ring , Which rolls those fiery spheres Thro' years and years. There would be perfect sympathy. Fancy and I, last evening, walk'd, And Amoret, of thee we talk'd; The West just then had stolen the sun, And his last blushes were begun: We sate, and mark'd how everything Did mourn his absence: how the spring That smil'd and curl'd about his beams, Whilst he was here, now check'd her streams: The wanton eddies of her face Were taught less noise, and smoother grace; And in a slow, sad channel went, Whisp'ring the banks their discontent: The careless ranks of flowers that spread Their perfum'd bosoms to his head. And with an open, free embrace, Did entertain his beamy face, Like absent friends point to the West, And on that weak reflection feast. If creatures then that have no sense, But the loose tie of influence, Though fate and time each day remove Those things that element their love, At such vast distance can agree, Why, Amoret, why should not we? If I were dead, and in my place Some fresher youth design'd To warm thee with new fires, and grace Those arms I left behind; Were he as faithful as the sun, That's wedded to the sphere; His blood as chaste and temp'rate run, As April's mildest tear; Or were he rich, and with his heaps And spacious share of earth, Could make divine affection cheap, And court his golden birth: For all these arts I'd not believe, No, though he should be thine The mighty amorist could give So rich a heart as mine. Fortune and beauty thou might'st find, And greater men than I: But my true resolvd mind They never shall come nigh. For I not for an hour did love, Or for a day desire, But with my soul had from above This endless, holy fire. MS. But with my true steadfast minde None can pretend to vie. 'Tis true, I am undone: yet, ere I die, I'll leave these sighs and tears a legacy To after-lovers: that, rememb'ring me, Those sickly flames which now benighted be, Fann'd by their warmer sighs, may love; and prove In them the metempsychosis of love. 'Twas I when others scorn'd vow'd you were fair, And sware that breath enrich'd the coarser air, Lent roses to your cheeks, made Flora bring Her nymphs with all the glories of the spring To wait upon thy face, and gave my heart A pledge to Cupid for a quicker dart, To arm those eyes against myself; to me Thou ow'st that tongue's bewitching harmony. I courted angels from those upper joys, And made them leave their spheres to hear thy voice. I made the Indian curse the hours he spent To seek his pearls, and wisely to repent His former folly, and confess a sin, Charm'd by the brighter lustre of thy skin. I borrow'd from the winds the gentler wing Of Zephyrus, and soft souls of the spring; And made to air those cheeks with fresher grace The warm inspirers dwell upon thy face. Darkness, and stars i' th' mid-day! They invite Our active fancies to believe it night: For taverns need no sun, but for a sign, Where rich tobacco and quick tapers shine; And royal, witty sack, the poet's soul, With brighter suns than he doth gild the bowl; As though the pot and poet did agree, Sack should to both illuminator be. That artificial cloud, with its curl'd brow, Tells us 'tis late; and that blue space below Is fir'd with many stars: mark! how they break In silent glances o'er the hills, and speak The evening to the plains, where, shot from far, The room, methinks, grows darker; and the air Contracts a sadder colour, and less fair. Or is't the drawer's skill? hath he no arts To blind us so we can't know pints from quarts? No, no, 'tis night: look where the jolly clown Musters his bleating herd and quits the down. Hark! how his rude pipe frets the quiet air, Whilst ev'ry hill proclaims Lycoris fair. Rich, happy man! that canst thus watch and sleep, Free from all cares, but thy wench, pipe and sheep! But see, the moon is up; view, where she stands Sentinel o'er the door, drawn by the hands Of some base painter, that for gain hath made Her face the landmark to the tippling trade. This cup to her, that to Endymion give; 'Twas wit at first, and wine that made them live. Choke may the painter! and his box disclose No other colours than his fiery nose; And may we no more of his pencil see Than two churchwardens, and mortality. Should we go now a-wand'ring, we should meet Now when each narrow lane, each nook and cave, Sign-posts and shop-doors, pimp for ev'ry knave, When riotous sinful plush, and tell-tale spurs Walk Fleet Street and the Strand, when the soft stirs Of bawdy, ruffled silks, turn night to day; And the loud whip and coach scolds all the way; When lust of all sorts, and each itchy blood From the Tower-wharf to Cymbeline, and Lud, Hunts for a mate, and the tir'd footman reels 'Twixt chairmen, torches, and the hackney wheels. Come, take the other dish; it is to him That made his horse a senator: each brim Look big as mine: the gallant, jolly beast Of all the herd you'll say was not the least. Now crown the second bowl, rich as his worth I'll drink it to; he, that like fire broke forth Into the Senate's face, cross'd Rubicon, And the State's pillars, with their laws thereon, And made the dull grey beards and furr'd gowns fly Into Brundusium to consult, and lie. This, to brave Sylla! why should it be said We drink more to the living than the dead? Flatt'rers and fools do use it: let us laugh At our own honest mirth; for they that quaff To honour others, do like those that sent Their gold and plate to strangers to be spent. Drink deep; this cup be pregnant, and the wine Spirit of wit, to make us all divine, That big with sack and mirth we may retire Possessors of more souls, and nobler fire; And by the influx of this painted sky, And labour'd forms, to higher matters fly; So, if a nap shall take us, we shall all, After full cups, have dreams poetical. Let's laugh now, and the press'd grape drink, Till the drowsy day-star wink; And in our merry, mad mirth run Faster, and further than the sun; And let none his cup forsake, Till that star again doth wake; So we men below shall move Equally with the gods above. Mark, when the evening's cooler wings Fan the afflicted air, how the faint sun, Leaving undone, What he begun, Those spurious flames suck'd up from slime and earth To their first, low birth, Resigns, and brings. They shoot their tinsel beams and vanities, Threading with those false fires their way; But as you stay And see them stray, You lose the flaming track, and subtly they Languish away, And cheat your eyes. Just so base, sublunary lovers' hearts Fed on loose profane desires, May for an eye Or face comply: But those remov'd, they will as soon depart, And show their art, And painted fires. Whilst I by pow'rful love, so much refin'd, That my absent soul the same is, Careless to miss A glance or kiss, Can with those elements of lust and sense Freely dispense, And court the mind. Thus to the North the loadstones move, And thus to them th' enamour'd steel aspires: I do affect; And thus by wingd beams, and mutual fire, Spirits and stars conspire: And this is Love. Leave Amoret, melt not away so fast Thy eyes' fair treasure; Fortune's wealthiest cast Deserves not one such pearl; for these, well spent, Can purchase stars, and buy a tenement For us in heaven; though here the pious streams Avail us not; who from that clue of sunbeams Could ever steal one thread? or with a kind Persuasive accent charm the wild loud wind? Fate cuts us all in marble, and the Book Forestalls our glass of minutes; we may look But seldom meet a change; think you a tear Can blot the flinty volume? shall our fear Or grief add to their triumphs? and must we Give an advantage to adversity? Dear, idle prodigal! is it not just We bear our stars? What though I had not dust Enough to cabinet a worm? nor stand Enslav'd unto a little dirt, or sand? I boast a better purchase, and can show The glories of a soul that's simply true. But grant some richer planet at my birth Had spied me out, and measur'd so much earth Or gold unto my share: I should have been Slave to these lower elements, and seen My high-born soul flag with their dross, and lie A pris'ner to base mud, and alchemy. I should perhaps eat orphans, and suck up A dozen distress'd widows in one cup; Nay, further, I should by that lawful stealth, Damn'd usury, undo the commonwealth; Or patent it in soap, and coals, and so Have the smiths curse me, and my laundress too; Geld wine, or his friend tobacco; and so bring The incens'd subject rebel to his king; And after all as those first sinners fell Sink lower than my gold, and lie in hell. Thanks then for this deliv'rance! blessed pow'rs, You that dispense man's fortune and his hours, How am I to you all engag'd! that thus By such strange means, almost miraculous, You should preserve me; you have gone the way To make me rich by taking all away. For I had I been rich as sure as fate, Would have been meddling with the king, or State, Or something to undo me; and 'tis fit, We know, that who hath wealth should have no wit, But, above all, thanks to that Providence That arm'd me with a gallant soul, and sense, 'Gainst all misfortunes, that hath breath'd so much Of Heav'n into me, that I scorn the touch Of these low things; and can with courage dare Whatever fate or malice can prepare: I envy no man's purse or mines: I know That, losing them, I've lost their curses too; And Amoret although our share in these Is not contemptible, nor doth much please Yet, whilst content and love we jointly vie, We have a blessing which no gold can buy. Hail, sacred shades! cool, leafy house! Chaste treasurer of all my vows And wealth! on whose soft bosom laid My love's fair steps I first betray'd: Henceforth no melancholy flight, No sad wing, or hoarse bird of night, Disturb this air, no fatal throat Of raven, or owl, awake the note Of our laid echo, no voice dwell Within these leaves, but Philomel. The poisonous ivy here no more His false twists on the oak shall score; Only the woodbine here may twine, As th' emblem of her love, and mine; The amorous sun shall here convey His best beams, in thy shades to play; The active air the gentlest show'rs Shall from his wings rain on thy flowers; And the moon from her dewy locks Shall deck thee with her brightest drops. Whatever can a fancy move, Or feed the eye, be on this grove! And when at last the winds and tears Of heaven, with the consuming years, Shall these green curls bring to decay, And clothe thee in an aged grey If ought a lover can foresee, Or if we poets prophets be From hence transplanted, thou shalt stand A fresh grove in th' Elysian land; Where most bless'd pair! as here on earth Thou first didst eye our growth, and birth; So there again, thou'lt see us move In our first innocence and love; And in thy shades, as now, so then, We'll kiss, and smile, and walk again. In all the parts of earth, from farthest West, And the Atlantic Isles, unto the East And famous Ganges, few there be that know What's truly good, and what is good, in show, Without mistake: for what is't we desire, Or fear discreetly? to whate'er aspire, So throughly bless'd, but ever as we speed, Repentance seals the very act, and deed? The easy gods, mov'd by no other fate Than our own pray'rs, whole kingdoms ruinate, And undo families: thus strife, and war Are the sword's prize, and a litigious bar The gown's prime wish. Vain confidence to share In empty honours and a bloody care To be the first in mischief, makes him die Fool'd 'twixt ambition and credulity. An oily tongue with fatal, cunning sense, And that sad virtue ever, eloquence, Are th' other's ruin, but the common curse; And each day's ill waits on the rich man's purse; He, whose large acres and imprison'd gold So far exceeds his father's store of old, As British whales the dolphins do surpass. In sadder times therefore, and when the laws Of Nero's fiat reign'd, an armd band Seiz'd on Longinus, and the spacious land Of wealthy Seneca, besieg'd the gates Of Lateranus, and his fair estate Divided as a spoil: in such sad feasts Soldiers though not invited are the guests. Though thou small pieces of the blessd mine Hast lodg'd about thee, travelling in the shine Of a pale moon, if but a reed doth shake, Mov'd by the wind, the shadow makes thee quake. Wealth hath its cares, and want has this relief, It neither fears the soldier nor the thief; Thy first choice vows, and to the gods best known, Are for thy stores' increase, that in all town Thy stock be greatest, but no poison lies I' th' poor man's dish; he tastes of no such spice. Be that thy care, when, with a kingly gust, Thou suck'st whole bowls clad in the gilded dust Of some rich mineral, whilst the false wine Sparkles aloft, and makes the draught divine. Blam'st thou the sages, then? because the one Would still be laughing, when he would be gone From his own door; the other cried to see His times addicted to such vanity? Smiles are an easy purchase, but to weep Is a hard act; for tears are fetch'd more deep. Democritus his nimble lungs would tire With constant laughter, and yet keep entire His stock of mirth, for ev'ry object was Addition to his store; though then alas! Sedans, and litters, and our Senate gowns, With robes of honour, fasces, and the frowns Of unbrib'd tribunes were not seen; but had He liv'd to see our Roman prtor clad In Jove's own mantle, seated on his high Embroider'd chariot 'midst the dust and cry Of the large theatre, loaden with a crown, Which scarce he could support for it would down, But that his servant props it and close by His page, a witness to his vanity: To these his sceptre and his eagle add, His trumpets, officers, and servants clad In white and purple; with the rest that day, He hir'd to triumph, for his bread, and pay; Had he these studied, sumptuous follies seen, 'Tis thought his wanton and effusive spleen Had kill'd the Abderite, though in that age When pride and greatness had not swell'd the stage So high as ours his harmless and just mirth From ev'ry object had a sudden birth. Nor was't alone their avarice or pride, Their triumphs or their cares he did deride; Their vain contentions or ridiculous fears, But even their very poverty and tears. He would at Fortune's threats as freely smile As others mourn; nor was it to beguile His crafty passions; but this habit he By nature had, and grave philosophy. He knew their idle and superfluous vows, And sacrifice, which such wrong zeal bestows, Were mere incendiaries; and that the gods, Not pleas'd therewith, would ever be at odds. Yet to no other air, nor better place Ow'd he his birth, than the cold, homely Thrace; Which shows a man may be both wise and good, Without the brags of fortune, or his blood. But envy ruins all: what mighty names Of fortune, spirit, action, blood, and fame, Hath this destroy'd? yea, for no other cause Than being such; their honour, worth and place, Was crime enough; their statues, arms and crowns Their ornaments of triumph, chariots, gowns, And what the herald, with a learnd care, Had long preserv'd, this madness will not spare. So once Sejanus' statue Rome allow'd Her demi-god, and ev'ry Roman bow'd To pay his safety's vows; but when that face Had lost Tiberius once, its former grace Was soon eclips'd; no diff'rence made alas! Betwixt his statue then, and common brass, They melt alike, and in the workman's hand For equal, servile use, like others stand. Go, now fetch home fresh bays, and pay new vows And state are now secur'd: Sejanus lies I' th' lictors' hands. Ye gods! what hearts and eyes Can one day's fortune change? the solemn cry Of all the world is, Let Sejanus die! They never lov'd the man, they swear; they know Nothing of all the matter, when, or how, By what accuser, for what cause, or why, By whose command or sentence he must die. But what needs this? the least pretence will hit, When princes fear, or hate a favourite. A large epistle stuff'd with idle fear, Vain dreams, and jealousies, directed here From Caprea does it; and thus ever die Subjects, when once they grow prodigious high. 'Tis well, I seek no more; but tell me how This took his friends? no private murmurs now? No tears? no solemn mourner seen? must all His glory perish in one funeral? O still true Romans! State-wit bids them praise The moon by night, but court the warmer rays O' th' sun by day; they follow fortune still, And hate or love discreetly, as their will And the time leads them. This tumultuous fate Puts all their painted favours out of date. And yet this people that now spurn, and tread This mighty favourite's once honour'd head, Had but the Tuscan goddess, or his stars Destin'd him for an empire, or had wars, Treason, or policy, or some higher pow'r Oppress'd secure Tiberius; that same hour That he receiv'd the sad Gemonian doom, Had crown'd him emp'ror of the world and Rome But Rome is now grown wise, and since that she Her suffrages, and ancient liberty Lost in a monarch's name, she takes no care For favourite or prince; nor will she share Their fickle glories, though in Cato's days She rul'd whole States and armies with her voice. Of all the honours now within her walls, She only dotes on plays and festivals. Nor is it strange; for when these meteors fall, They draw an ample ruin with them: all Share in the storm; each beam sets with the sun, And equal hazard friends and flatt'rers run. This makes, that circled with distractive fear The lifeless, pale Sejanus' limbs they tear, And lest the action might a witness need, They bring their servants to confirm the deed; Nor is it done for any other end, Than to avoid the title of his friend. So falls ambitious man, and such are still All floating States built on the people's will: Hearken all you! whom this bewitching lust Of an hour's glory, and a little dust Swells to such dear repentance! you that can Measure whole kingdoms with a thought or span! Would you be as Sejanus? would you have, So you might sway as he did, such a grave? Would you be rich as he? command, dispose, All acts and offices? all friends and foes? Be generals of armies and colleague Unto an emperor? break or make a league? No doubt you would; for both the good and bad An equal itch of honour ever had. But O! what state can be so great or good, As to be bought with so much shame and blood? Alas! Sejanus will too late confess 'Twas only pride and greatness made him less: For he that moveth with the lofty wind Of Fortune, and Ambition, unconfin'd In act or thought, doth but increase his height, That he may loose it with more force and weight; Scorning a base, low ruin, as if he Would of misfortune make a prodigy. Tell, mighty Pompey, Crassus, and O thou That mad'st Rome kneel to thy victorious brow, What but the weight of honours, and large fame After your worthy acts, and height of name, Destroy'd you in the end? The envious Fates, Easy to further your aspiring States, Us'd them to quell you too; pride, and excess. In ev'ry act did make you thrive the less. Few kings are guilty of grey hairs, or die Without a stab, a draught, or treachery. And yet to see him, that but yesterday Saw letters first, how he will scrape, and pray; And all her feast-time tire Minerva's ears For fame, for eloquence, and store of years To thrive and live in; and then lest he dotes, His boy assists him with his box and notes. Fool that thou art! not to discern the ill These vows include; what, did Rome's consul kill Her Cicero? what, him whose very dust Greece celebrates as yet; whose cause, though just, Scarce banishment could end; nor poison save His free-born person from a foreign grave? All this from eloquence! both head and hand The tongue doth forfeit; petty wits may stand Secure from danger, but the nobler vein With loss of blood the bar doth often stain. Had all been thus, thou might'st have scorn'd the sword Of fierce Antonius; here is not one word Doth pinch; I like such stuff, 'tis safer far Than thy Philippics, or Pharsalia's war. What sadder end than his, whom Athens saw At once her patriot, oracle, and law? Unhappy then is he, and curs'd in stars Whom his poor father, blind with soot and scars, Sends from the anvil's harmless chine, to wear The factious gown, and tire his client's ear And purse with endless noise. Trophies of war, Old rusty armour, with an honour'd scar, And wheels of captiv'd chariots, with a piece Of some torn British galley, and to these The ensign too, and last of all the train The pensive pris'ner loaden with his chain, Are thought true Roman honours; these the Greek And rude barbarians equally do seek. Thus air, and empty fame, are held a prize Beyond fair virtue; for all virtue dies Without reward; and yet by this fierce lust Of fame, and titles to outlive our dust, And monuments though all these things must die And perish like ourselves whole kingdoms lie Ruin'd and spoil'd: put Hannibal i' th' scale, What weight affords the mighty general? This is the man, whom Afric's spacious land Bounded by th' Indian Sea, and Nile's hot sand Could not contain Ye gods! that give to men Such boundless appetites, why state you them So short a time? either the one deny, Or give their acts and them eternity. All Ethiopia, to the utmost bound Of Titan's course, than which no land is found Less distant from the sun with him that ploughs That fertile soil where fam'd Iberus flows, Are not enough to conquer; pass'd now o'er The Pyrrhene hills, the Alps with all its store Of ice, and rocks clad in eternal snow, As if that Nature meant to give the blow Denies him passage; straight on ev'ry side He wounds the hill, and by strong hand divides The monstrous pile; nought can ambition stay. The world and Nature yield to give him way. And now pass'd o'er the Alps, that mighty bar 'Twixt France and Rome, fear of the future war Strikes Italy; success and hope doth fire His lofty spirits with a fresh desire. All is undone as yet saith he unless Our Pnish forces we advance, and press Upon Rome's self; break down her gates and wall, And plant our colours in Suburra's vale. O the rare sight! if this great soldier we Arm'd on his Getick elephant might see! But what's the event? O glory, how the itch Of thy short wonders doth mankind bewitch! He that but now all Italy and Spain Had conquer'd o'er, is beaten out again; And in the heart of Afric, and the sight Of his own Carthage, forc'd to open flight. Banish'd from thence, a fugitive he posts To Syria first, then to Bithynia's coasts, Both places by his sword secur'd, though he In this distress must not acknowledg'd be; Where once a general he triumphed, now To show what Fortune can, he begs as low. And thus that soul which through all nations hurl'd Conquest and war, and did amaze the world, Of all those glories robb'd, at his last breath, Fortune would not vouchsafe a soldier's death. For all that blood the field of Cann boasts, And sad Apulia fill'd with Roman ghosts, No other end freed from the pile and sword Than a poor ring would Fortune him afford. Go now, ambitious man! new plots design, March o'er the snowy Alps and Apennine; That, after all, at best thou may'st but be A pleasing story to posterity! The Macedon one world could not contain, We hear him of the narrow earth complain, And sweat for room, as if Seriphus Isle Or Gyara had held him in exile; But Babylon this madness can allay, And give the great man but his length of clay. The highest thoughts and actions under heaven Death only with the lowest dust lays even. It is believed if what Greece writes be true That Xerxes with his Persian fleet did hew Their ways through mountains, that their sails full blown Like clouds hung over Athos and did drown The spacious continent, and by plain force Betwixt the mount and it, made a divorce; That seas exhausted were, and made firm land, And Sestos joined unto Abydos strand; That on their march his Medes but passing by Drank thee, Scamander, and Melenus dry; With whatsoe'er incredible design Sostratus sings, inspir'd with pregnant wine. But what's the end? He that the other day Divided Hellespont, and forc'd his way Through all her angry billows, that assign'd New punishments unto the waves, and wind, No sooner saw the Salaminian seas But he was driven out by Themistocles, And of that fleet supposed to be so great, That all mankind shar'd in the sad defeat Not one sail sav'd, in a poor fisher's boat, Chas'd o'er the working surge, was glad to float, Cutting his desp'rate course through the tir'd flood, And fought again with carcases, and blood. O foolish mad Ambition! these are still The famous dangers that attend thy will. Give store of days, good Jove, give length of years, Are the next vows; these with religious fears And constancy we pay; but what's so bad As a long, sinful age? what cross more sad Than misery of years? how great an ill Is that which doth but nurse more sorrow still? It blacks the face, corrupt and dulls the blood, Benights the quickest eye, distastes the food, And such deep furrows cuts i' th' checker'd skin As in th' old oaks of Tabraca are seen. Youth varies in most things; strength, beauty, wit, Are several graces; but where age doth hit It makes no difference; the same weak voice, And trembling ague in each member lies: A general hateful baldness, with a curs'd Perpetual pettishness; and, which is worst, A foul, strong flux of humours, and more pain To feed, than if he were to nurse again; So tedious to himself, his wife, and friends, That his own sons, and servants, wish his end. His taste and feeling dies; and of that fire The am'rous lover burns in, no desire: Or if there were, what pleasure could it be, Where lust doth reign without ability? Nor is this all: what matters it, where he Sits in the spacious stage? who can nor see, Nor hear what's acted, whom the stiller voice Of spirited, wanton airs, or the loud noise Of trumpets cannot pierce; whom thunder can But scarce inform who enters, or what man He personates, what 'tis they act, or say? How many scenes are done? what time of day? Besides that little blood his carcase holds Hath lost its native warmth, and fraught with colds Catarrhs, and rheums, to thick black jelly turns, And never but in fits and fevers burns. Such vast infirmities, so huge a stock Of sickness and diseases to him flock, That Hyppia ne'er so many lovers knew, Nor wanton Maura; physic never slew So many patients, nor rich lawyers spoil More wards and widows; it were lesser toil To number out what manors and domains Licinius' razor purchas'd: one complains Of weakness in the back, another pants For lack of breath, the third his eyesight wants; Nay, some so feeble are, and full of pain, That infant-like they must be fed again. These faint too at their meals; their wine they spill, And like young birds, that wait the mother's bill, They gape for meat; but sadder far than this Their senseless ignorance and dotage is; For neither they, their friends, nor servants know, Nay, those themselves begot, and bred up too, No longer now they'll own; for madly they Proscribe them all, and what, on the last day, The misers cannot carry to the grave For their past sins, their prostitutes must have. But grant age lack'd these plagues: yet must they see As great, as many: frail mortality, In such a length of years, hath many falls, And deads a life with frequent funerals. The nimblest hour in all the span can steal A friend, or brother from's; there's no repeal In death, or time; this day a wife we mourn, To-morrow's tears a son; and the next urn A sister fills. Long-livers have assign'd These curses still, that with a restless mind, An age of fresh renewing cares they buy, And in a tide of tears grow old and die. Nestor, if we great Homer may believe In his full strength three hundred years did live: Happy thou'lt say that for so long a time Enjoy'd free nature, with the grape and wine Of many autumns; but, I prithee thee, hear What Nestor says himself, when he his dear Antilochus had lost; how he complains Of life's too large extent, and copious pains? Of all he meets, he asks what is the cause He liv'd thus long; for what breach of their laws The gods thus punish'd him? what sin had he Done worthy of a long life's misery. Thus Peleus his Achilles mourned, and he Thus wept that his Ulysses lost at sea. Had Priam died before Phereclus' fleet Was built, or Paris stole the fatal Greek, Troy had yet stood, and he perhaps had gone In peace unto the lower shades; his son Sav'd with his plenteous offspring, and the rest In solemn pomp bearing his fun'ral chest. But long life hinder'd this: unhappy he, Kept for a public ruin, liv'd to see All Asia lost, and ere he could aspire, In his own house saw both the sword and fire; All white with age and cares, his feeble arm Had now forgot the war; but this alarm Gathers his dying spirits; and as we An aged ox worn out with labour see By his ungrateful master, after all His years of toil, a thankless victim fall: So he by Jove's own altar; which shows we Are nowhere safe from heaven, and destiny: Yet died a man; but his surviving queen, Freed from the Greekish sword, was barking seen. I haste to Rome, and Pontus' king let pass, With Lydian Cr sus, whom in vain alas! Just Solon's grave advice bad to attend, That happiness came not before the end. What man more bless'd in any age to come Or past, could Nature show the world, or Rome, Than Marius was? if amidst the pomp of war, And triumphs fetch'd with Roman blood from far, His soul had fled; exile and fetters then He ne'er had seen, nor known Minturna's fen; Nor had it, after Carthage got, been said A Roman general had begg'd his bread. Thus Pompey th' envious gods, and Rome's ill stars Freed from Campania's fevers, and the wars Doom'd to Achilles' sword: our public vows Made Csar guiltless; but sent him to lose His head at Nile: this curse Cethegus miss'd: This Lentulus, and this made him resist That mangled by no lictor's axe, fell dead Entirely Catiline, and sav'd his head. The anxious matrons, with their foolish zeal, Are the last votaries, and their appeal Is all for beauty; with soft speech, and slow, They pray for sons, but with a louder vow Commend a female feature: all that can Make woman pleasing now they shift, and scan And when reprov'd, they say, Latona's pair The mother never thinks can be too fair. But sad Lucretia warns to wish no face Like hers: Virginia would bequeath her grace To crook-back Rutila in exchange; for still The fairest children do their parents fill With greatest cares; so seldom chastity Is found with beauty; though some few there be That with a strict, religious care contend Th' old, modest, Sabine customs to defend: Besides, wise Nature to some faces grants An easy blush, and where she freely plants A less instruction serves: but both these join'd, At Rome would both be forc'd or else purloin'd. So steel'd a forehead Vice hath, that dares win, And bribe the father to the children's sin; But whom have gifts defiled not? what good face Did ever want these tempters? pleasing grace Betrays itself; what time did Nero mind A coarse, maim'd shape? what blemish'd youth confin'd His goatish pathic? whence then flow these joys Of a fair issue? whom these sad annoys Wait, and grow up with; whom perhaps thou'lt see Public adulterers, and must be Subject to all the curses, plagues, and awe Of jealous madmen, and the Julian law; Nor canst thou hope they'll find a milder star, Or more escapes than did the god of war. But worse than all, a jealous brain confines His fury to no law; what rage assigns Is present justice: thus the rash sword spills This lecher's blood; the scourge another kills. But thy spruce boy must touch no other face Than a patrician? is of any race So they be rich; Servilia is as good, With wealth, as she that boasts Iulus' blood. To please a servant all is cheap; what thing In all their stock to the last suit, and king, As generous as the patrician is. But thou wilt say what hurt's a beauteous skin With a chaste soul? Ask Theseus' son, and him That Stenob a murder'd; for both these Can tell how fatal 'twas in them to please. A woman's spleen then carries most of fate, When shame and sorrow aggravate her hate. Resolve me now, had Silius been thy son, In such a hazard what should he have done? Of all Rome's youth, this was the only best, In whom alone beauty and worth did rest. This Messalina saw, and needs he must Be ruin'd by the emp'ror, or her lust. All in the face of Rome, and the world's eye Though Csar's wife, a public bigamy She dares attempt; and that the act might bear More prodigy, the notaries appear, And augurs to't; and to complete the sin In solemn form, a dowry is brought in. All this thou'lt say in private might have pass'd But she'll not have it so; what course at last? What should he do? If Messaline be cross'd, Without redress thy Silius will be lost; If not, some two days' length is all he can Keep from the grave; just so much as will span This news to Hostia, to whose fate he owes That Claudius last his own dishonour knows. But he obeys, and for a few hours' lust Forfeits that glory should outlive his dust; Nor was it much a fault; for whether he Obey'd or not, 'twas equal destiny. So fatal beauty is, and full of waste. That neither wanton can be safe, nor chaste. What then should man pray for? what is't that he Can beg of Heaven, without impiety? Take my advice: first to the gods commit All cares; for they things competent and fit For us foresee; besides, man is more dear To them than to himself; we blindly here, Led by the world and lust, in vain assay To get us portions, wives and sons; but they Already know all that we can intend, And of our children's children see the end. Yet that thou may'st have something to commend With thanks unto the gods for what they send; Pray for a wise and knowing soul; a sad, Discreet, true valour, that will scorn to add A needless horror to thy death; that knows 'Tis but a debt which man to nature owes; That starts not at misfortunes, that can sway And keep all passions under lock and key; That covets nothing, wrongs none, and prefers An honest want, before rich injurers. All this thou hast within thyself, and may Be made thy own, if thou wilt take the way; What boots the world's wild, loose applause? what Frail, perilous honours add unto a man? What length of years, wealth, or a rich fair wife? Virtue alone can make a happy life. To a wise man nought comes amiss: but we Fortune adore, and make our deity. What planet rul'd your birth? what witty star? That you so like in souls as bodies are! So like in both, that you seem born to free The starry art from vulgar calumny. My doubts are solv'd, from hence my faith begins, Not only your faces but your wits are twins. When this bright Gemini shall from Earth ascend, They will new light to dull-ey'd mankind lend, Teach the star-gazers, and delight their eyes, Being fix'd a constellation in the skies. I call'd it once my sloth: in such an age So many volumes deep, I not a page? But I recant, and vow 'twas thrifty care That kept my pen from spending on slight ware, And breath'd it for a prize, whose pow'rful shine Doth both reward the striver, and refine. Such are thy poems, friend: for since th' hast writ, I can't reply to any name, but wit; And lest amidst the throng that make us groan, Mine prove a groundless heresy alone, Thus I dispute, Hath there not rev'rence been Paid to the beard at door, for Lord within? Who notes the spindle-leg or hollow eye Of the thin usher, the fair lady by? Thus I sin freely, neighbour to a hand Which, while I aim to strengthen, gives command For my protection; and thou art to me At once my subject and security. I write not here, as if thy last in store Of learnd friends; 'tis known that thou hast more; Who, were they told of this, would find a way To raise a guard of poets without pay, And bring as many hands to thy edition, As th' City should unto their May'r's petition. But thou wouldst none of this, lest it should be Thy muster rather than our courtesy; Thou wouldst not beg as knights do, and appear Poet by voice and suffrage of the shire; That were enough to make my Muse advance Amongst the crutches; nay, it might enhance Our charity, and we should think it fit The State should build an hospital for wit. But here needs no relief: thy richer verse Creates all poets, that can but rehearse, And they, like tenants better'd by their land, Should pay thee rent for what they understand. Thou art not of that lamentable nation Who make a blessed alms of approbation, Whose fardel-notes are briefs in ev'rything, But, that they are not Licens'd by the king . Without such scrape-requests thou dost come forth Arm'd though I speak it with thy proper worth, And needest not this noise of friends, for we Write out of love, not thy necessity. And though this sullen age possessd be With some strange desamour to poetry, Yet I suspect thy fancy so delights The Puritans will turn thy proselytes, And that thy flame, when once abroad it shines, Will bring thee as many friends as thou hast lines. When Daphne's lover here first wore the bays, Eurotas' secret streams heard all his lays, And holy Orpheus, Nature's busy child, By headlong Hebrus his deep hymns compil'd; Soft Petrarch thaw'd by Laura's flames did weep On Tiber's banks, when she proud fair! could sleep; Mosella boasts Ausonius, and the Thames Doth murmur Sidney's Stella to her streams; While Severn, swoln with joy and sorrow, wears Castara's smiles mix'd with fair Sabrin's tears. Thus poets like the nymphs, their pleasing themes Haunted the bubbling springs and gliding streams; And happy banks! whence such fair flow'rs have sprung, But happier those where they have sat and sung! Poets like angels where they once appear Hallow the place, and each succeeding year Adds rev'rence to't, such as at length doth give This aged faith, that there their genii live. Hence th' ancients say, that from this sickly air They pass to regions more refin'd and fair, To meadows strew'd with lilies and the rose, And shades whose youthful green no old age knows; Where all in white they walk, discourse, and sing Like bees' soft murmurs, or a chiding spring. But Isca, whensoe'er those shades I see, And thy lov'd arbours must no more know me, When I am laid to rest hard by thy streams, And my sun sets, where first it sprang in beams, I'll leave behind me such a large, kind light, As shall redeem thee from oblivious night, And in these vows which living yet I pay, Shed such a previous and enduring ray, As shall from age to age thy fair name lead, 'Till rivers leave to run, and men to read. First, may all bards born after me When I am ashes sing of thee! May thy green banks or streams, or none Be both their hill and Helicon! May vocal groves grow there, and all The shades in them prophetical, Where laid men shall more fair truths see Than fictions were of Thessaly! May thy gentle swains like flow'rs Sweetly spend their youthful hours, And thy beauteous nymphs like doves Be kind and faithful to their loves! Garlands, and songs, and roundelays, Mild, dewy nights, and sunshine days, The turtle's voice, joy without fear, Dwell on thy bosom all the year! May the evet and the toad Within thy banks have no abode, Nor the wily, winding snake Her voyage through thy waters make! In all thy journey to the main No nitrous clay, nor brimstone-vein Mix with thy streams, but may they pass Fresh on the air, and clear as glass, And where the wand'ring crystal treads Roses shall kiss, and couple heads! The factor-wind from far shall bring The odours of the scatter'd Spring, And loaden with the rich arrear, Spend it in spicy whispers there. No sullen heats, nor flames that are Offensive, and canicular, Shine on thy sands, nor pry to see Thy scaly, shading family, But noons as mild as Hesper's rays, Or the first blushes of fair days! What gifts more Heav'n or Earth can add, With all those blessings be thou clad! Crown all about thee! and whatever Fate Impose elsewhere, whether the graver state Or some toy else, may those loud, anxious cares For dead and dying things the common wares And shows of Time ne'er break thy peace, nor make Thy repos'd arms to a new war awake! But freedom, safety, joy and bliss, United in one loving kiss, Surround thee quite, and style thy borders The land redeem'd from all disorders! Bless me! what damps are here! how stiff an air! Kelder of mists, a second fiat's care, Front'spiece o' th' grave and darkness, a display Of ruin'd man, and the disease of day, Lean, bloodless shamble, where I can descry Fragments of men, rags of anatomy, Corruption's wardrobe, the transplantive bed Of mankind, and th' exchequer of the dead! How thou arrests my sense! how with the sight My winter'd blood grows stiff to all delight! Torpedo to the eye! whose least glance can Freeze our wild lusts, and rescue headlong man. Eloquent silence! able to immure An atheist's thoughts, and blast an epicure. Were I a Lucian, Nature in this dress Would make me wish a Saviour, and confess. Where are you, shoreless thoughts, vast tenter'd hope, Ambitious dreams, aims of an endless scope, Whose stretch'd excess runs on a string too high, And on the rack of self-extension die? Chameleons of state, air-monging band, Whose breath like gunpowder blows up a land, Come see your dissolution, and weigh What a loath'd nothing you shall be one day. As th' elements by circulation pass From one to th' other, and that which first was I so again, so 'tis with you; the grave And Nature but complot; what the one gave The other takes; think, then, that in this bed There sleep the relics of as proud a head, As stern and subtle as your own, that hath Perform'd, or forc'd as much, whose tempest-wrath Hath levell'd kings with slaves, and wisely then Calm these high furies, and descend to men. Thus Cyrus tam'd the Macedon; a tomb Check'd him, who thought the world too straight a room. Have I obey'd the powers of face, A beauty able to undo the race Of easy man? I look but here, and straight I am inform'd, the lovely counterfeit Was but a smoother clay. That famish'd slave Beggar'd by wealth, who starves that he may save, Brings hither but his sheet; nay, th' ostrich-man That feeds on steel and bullet, he that can Outswear his lordship, and reply as tough To a kind word, as if his tongue were buff, Is chap-fall'n here: worms without wit or fear Defy him now; Death hath disarm'd the bear. Thus could I run o'er all the piteous score Of erring men, and having done, meet more, Their shuffled wills, abortive, vain intents, Fantastic humours, perilous ascents, False, empty honours, traitorous delights, And whatsoe'er a blind conceit invites; But these and more which the weak vermins swell, Are couch'd in this accumulative cell, Which I could scatter; but the grudging sun Calls home his beams, and warns me to be gone; Day leaves me in a double night, and I Must bid farewell to my sad library. Yet with these notes Henceforth with thought of thee I'll season all succeeding jollity, Yet damn not mirth, nor think too much is fit; Excess hath no religion, nor wit; But should wild blood swell to a lawless strain, One check from thee shall channel it again. Thanks, mighty Silver! I rejoice to see How I have spoil'd his thrift, by spending thee. Now thou art gone, he courts my wants with more, His decoy gold, and bribes me to restore. As lesser lode-stones with the North consent, Naturally moving to their element, As bodies swarm to th' centre, and that fire Man stole from heaven, to heav'n doth still aspire, So this vast crying sum draws in a less; And hence this bag more Northward laid I guess, For 'tis of pole-star force, and in this sphere Though th' least of many, rules the master-bear. Prerogative of debts! how he doth dress Without a fee for reading; and 'tis fit, For gold's the best restorative of wit. Oh how he gilds them o'er! with what delight I read those lines, which angels do indite! But wilt have money, Og? must I dispurse Will nothing serve thee but a poet's curse? Wilt rob an altar thus? and sweep at once What Orpheus-like I forc'd from stocks and stones? 'Twill never swell thy bag, nor ring one peal In thy dark chest. Talk not of shreeves, or gaol; I fear them not. I have no land to glut Thy dirty appetite, and make thee strut Nimrod of acres; I'll no speech prepare To court the hopeful cormorant, thine heir. For there's a kingdom at thy beck if thou But kick this dross: Parnassus' flow'ry brow I'll give thee with my Tempe, and to boot That horse which struck a fountain with his foot. A bed of roses I'll provide for thee, And crystal springs shall drop thee melody. The breathing shades we'll haunt, where ev'ry leaf Shall whisper us asleep, though thou art deaf. Those waggish nymphs, too, which none ever yet Durst make love to, we'll teach the loving fit; We'll suck the coral of their lips, and feed Upon their spicy breath, a meal at need: Rove in their amber-tresses, and unfold That glist'ring grove, the curled wood of gold; Then peep for babies, a new puppet play, And riddle what their prattling eyes would say. But here thou must remember to dispurse, For without money all this is a curse. Thou must for more bags call, and so restore This iron age to gold, as once before. This thou must do, and yet this is not all, For thus the poet would be still in thrall, Thou must then if live thus my nest of honey Cancel old bonds, and beg to lend more money. I wonder, James, through the whole history Of ages, such entails of poverty Are laid on poets; lawyers they say have found A trick to cut them; would they were but bound To practise on us, though for this thing we Should pay if possible their bribes and fee. Search as thou canst the old and modern store Of Rome and ours, in all the witty score Thou shalt not find a rich one; take each clime, And run o'er all the pilgrimage of time, Thou'lt meet them poor, and ev'rywhere descry A threadbare, goldless genealogy. Nature it seems when she meant us for earth Spent so much of her treasure in the birth Thus stor'd within, beggars us outwardly. Woful profusion! at how dear a rate Are we made up! all hope of thrift and state Lost for a verse. When I by thoughts look back Into the womb of time, and see the rack Stand useless there, until we are produc'd Unto the torture, and our souls infus'd To learn afflictions, I begin to doubt That as some tyrants use from their chain'd rout Of slaves to pick out one whom for their sport They keep afflicted by some ling'ring art; So we are merely thrown upon the stage The mirth of fools and legend of the age. When I see in the ruins of a suit Some nobler breast, and his tongue sadly mute Feed on the vocal silence of his eye, And knowing cannot reach the remedy; When souls of baser stamp shine in their store, And he of all the throng is only poor; When French apes for foreign fashions pay, And English legs are dress'd th' outlandish way, So fine too, that they their own shadows woo, While he walks in the sad and pilgrim shoe; I'm mad at Fate, and angry ev'n to sin, To see deserts and learning clad so thin; To think how th' earthly usurer can brood Upon his bags, and weigh the precious food With palsied hands, as if his soul did fear The scales could rob him of what he laid there. Like devils that on hid treasures sit, or those Whose jealous eyes trust not beyond their nose, They guard the dirt and the bright idol hold Close, and commit adultery with gold. A curse upon their dross! how have we sued For a few scatter'd chips? how oft pursu'd Petitions with a blush, in hope to squeeze For their souls' health, more than our wants, a piece? Their steel-ribb'd chests and purse rust eat them both! Have cost us with much paper many an oath, And protestations of such solemn sense, As if our souls were sureties for the pence. Should we a full night's learnd cares present, They'll scarce return us one short hour's content. 'Las! they're but quibbles, things we poets feign, The short-liv'd squibs and crackers of the brain. But we'll be wiser, knowing 'tis not they That must redeem the hardship of our way. Whether a Higher Power, or that star Which, nearest heav'n, is from the earth most far, Oppress us thus, or angell'd from that sphere By our strict guardians are kept luckless here, It matters not, we shall one day obtain Our native and celestial scope again. Since last we met, thou and thy horse my dear Have not so much as drunk, or litter'd here; I wonder, though thyself be thus deceas'd, Thou hast the spite to coffin up thy beast; Or is the palfrey sick, and his rough hide With the penance of one spur mortified? Or taught by thee like Pythagoras's ox Is then his master grown more orthodox Whatever 'tis, a sober cause't must be That thus long bars us of thy company. The town believes thee lost, and didst thou see But half her suff'rings, now distress'd for thee, Thou'ldst swear like Rome her foul, polluted walls Were sack'd by Brennus and the savage Gauls. Abominable face of things! here's noise Of banged mortars, blue aprons, and boys, Pigs, dogs, and drums, with the hoarse, hellish notes Of politicly-deaf usurers' throats, With new fine Worships, and the old cast team Of Justices vex'd with the cough and phlegm. 'Midst these the Cross looks sad, and in the Shire- Hall furs of an old Saxon fox appear, With brotherly ruffs and beards, and a strange sight Of high monumental hats, ta'en at the fight Of 'Eighty-eight; while ev'ry burgess foots The mortal pavement in eternal boots. Hadst thou been bach'lor, I had soon divin'd Thy close retirements, and monastic mind; Perhaps some nymph had been to visit, or The beauteous churl was to be waited for, And like the Greek, ere you the sport would miss, You stay'd, and strok'd the distaff for a kiss. But in this age, when thy cool, settled blood Is ti'd t'one flesh, and thou almost grown good, I know not how to reach the strange device, Except Domitian-like thou murder'st flies. Or is't thy piety? for who can tell But thou may'st prove devout, and love a cell, And like a badger with attentive looks In the dark hole sit rooting up of books. Quick hermit! what a peaceful change hadst thou, Without the noise of haircloth, whip, or vow! But there is no redemption? must there be No other penance but of liberty? Why, two months hence, if thou continue thus, Thy memory will scarce remain with us, The drawers have forgot thee, and exclaim They have not seen thee here since Charles, his reign, Or if they mention thee, like some old man, That at each word inserts Sir, as I can Remember so the cyph'rers puzzle me With a dark, cloudy character of thee. That certs! I fear thou wilt be lost, and we Must ask the fathers ere't be long for thee. Come! leave this sullen state, and let not wine And precious wit lie dead for want of thine. Shall the dull market-landlord with his rout Of sneaking tenants dirtily swill out This harmless liquor? shall they knock and beat For sack, only to talk of rye and wheat? O let not such prepost'rous tippling be In our metropolis; may I ne'er see Such tavern-sacrilege, nor lend a line To weep the rapes and tragedy of wine! Here lives that chymic, quick fire which betrays Fresh spirits to the blood, and warms our lays. I have reserv'd 'gainst thy approach a cup That were thy Muse stark dead, shall raise her up, And teach her yet more charming words and skill Than ever C lia, Chloris, Astrophil, Or any of the threadbare names inspir'd Poor rhyming lovers with a mistress fir'd. Come then! and while the slow icicle hangs At the stiff thatch, and Winter's frosty pangs Benumb the year, blithe as of old let us 'Midst noise and war of peace and mirth discuss. This portion thou wert born for: why should we Vex at the time's ridiculous misery? An age that thus hath fool'd itself, and will Spite of thy teeth and mine persist so still. Let's sit then at this fire, and while we steal A revel in the town, let others seal, Purchase or cheat, and who can, let them pay, Till those black deeds bring on the darksome day. Innocent spenders we! a better use Shall wear out our short lease, and leave th' obtuse Rout to their husks; they and their bags at best Have cares in earnest; we care for a jest. I've read thy soul's fair nightpiece, and have seen Th' amours and courtship of the silent Queen, Her stoln descents to Earth, and what did move her To juggle first with Heav'n, then with a lover, With Latmos' louder rescue, and alas! To find her out a hue and cry in brass; Thy journal of deep mysteries, and sad Nocturnal pilgrimage, with thy dreams clad In fancies darker than thy cave, thy glass Of sleepy draughts; and as thy soul did pass In her calm voyage what discourse she heard Of spirits, what dark groves and ill-shap'd guard Ismena led thee through, with thy proud flight O'er Periardes, and deep, musing night Near fair Eurotas' banks; what solemn green The neighbour shades wear, and what forms are seen In their large bowers, with that sad path and seat Which none but light-heel'd nymphs and fairies beat; Their solitary life, and how exempt From common frailty, the severe contempt They have of man, their privilege to live A tree, or fountain, and in that reprieve What ages they consume, with the sad vale Of Diophania, and the mournful tale, Of th' bleeding vocal myrtle; these and more Thy richer thoughts, we are upon the score To thy rare fancy for, nor dost thou fall From thy first majesty, or ought at all Betray consumption; thy full vig'rous bays Wear the same green, and scorn the lean decays Of style, or matter. Just so have I known Some crystal spring, that from the neighbour down Deriv'd her birth, in gentle murmurs steal To their next vale, and proudly there reveal Her streams in louder accents, adding still More noise and waters to her channel, till At last swoln with increase she glides along The lawns and meadows in a wanton throng Of frothy billows, and in one great name Swallows the tributary brooks' drown'd fame. Nor are they mere inventions, for we In th' same piece find scatter'd philosophy And hidden, dispers'd truths that folded lie In the dark shades of deep allegory; So neatly weav'd, like arras, they descry Fables with truth, fancy with history. So that thou hast in this thy curious mould Cast that commended mixture wish'd of old, Which shall these contemplations render far Less mutable, and lasting as their star, And while there is a people or a sun, Endymion's story with the moon shall run. So Grosart, for the heat of the original. I am confirmed, and so much wing is given To my wild thoughts, that they dare strike at heav'n. A full year's grief I struggled with, and stood Still on my sandy hopes' uncertain good, So loth was I to yield; to all those fears I still oppos'd thee, and denied my tears. But thou art gone! and the untimely loss Like that one day hath made all others cross. Have you seen on some river's flow'ry brow A well-built elm or stately cedar grow, Whose curled tops gilt with the morning-ray Beckon'd the sun, and whisper'd to the day, When unexpected from the angry North A fatal sullen whirlwind sallies forth, And with a full-mouth'd blast rends from the ground The shady twins, which rushing scatter round Their sighing leaves, whilst overborn with strength Their trembling heads bow to a prostrate length? So forc'd fell he; so immaturely Death Stifled his able heart and active breath. The world scarce knew him yet, his early soul Had but new-broke her day, and rather stole A sight than gave one; as if subtly she Would learn our stock, but hide his treasury. His years should Time lay both his wings and glass Unto his charge could not be summ'd alas! To a full score; though in so short a span His riper thoughts had purchas'd more of man Than all those worthless livers, which yet quick Have quite outgone their own arithmetic. He seiz'd perfections, and without a dull And mossy grey possess'd a solid skull; No crooked knowledge neither, nor did he Wear the friend's name for ends and policy, And then lay't by; as those lost youths of th' stage Who only flourish'd for the Play's short age He wore his friends, but chiefly at his heart. Nor was it only in this he did excel, His equal valour could as much, as well. He knew no fear but of his God; yet durst No injury, nor as some have e'er purs'd The sweat and tears of others, yet would be More forward in a royal gallantry Than all those vast pretenders, which of late Swell'd in the ruins of their king and State. He weav'd not self-ends and the public good Into one piece, nor with the people's blood Fill'd his own veins; in all the doubtful way Conscience and honour rul'd him. O that day When like the fathers in the fire and cloud I miss'd thy face! I might in ev'ry crowd See arms like thine, and men advance, but none So near to lightning mov'd, nor so fell on. Have you observ'd how soon the nimble eye Brings th' object to conceit, and doth so vie Performance with the soul, that you would swear The act and apprehension both lodg'd there; Just so mov'd he: like shot his active hand Drew blood, ere well the foe could understand. But here I lost him. Whether the last turn Of thy few sands call'd on thy hasty urn, Or some fierce rapid fate hid from the eye Hath hurl'd thee pris'ner to some distant sky, I cannot tell, but that I do believe Thy courage such as scorn'd a base reprieve. Whatever 'twas, whether that day thy breath Suffer'd a civil or the common death, Which I do most suspect, and that I have Fail'd in the glories of so known a grave; Though thy lov'd ashes miss me, and mine eyes Had no acquaintance with thy exequies, Nor at the last farewell, torn from thy sight On the cold sheet have fix'd a sad delight, Yet whate'er pious hand instead of mine Hath done this office to that dust of thine, And till thou rise again from thy low bed Lent a cheap pillow to thy quiet head, Though but a private turf, it can do more To keep thy name and memory in store Than all those lordly fools which lock their bones Th'art rich in thy own fame, and needest not These marble-frailties, nor the gilded blot Of posthume honours; there is not one sand Sleeps o'er thy grave, but can outbid that hand And pencil too, so that of force we must Confess their heaps show lesser than thy dust. And blessed soul! though this my sorrow can Add nought to thy perfections, yet as man Subject to envy, and the common fate, It may redeem thee to a fairer date. As some blind dial, when the day is done, Can tell us at midnight there was a sun, So these perhaps, though much beneath thy fame, May keep some weak remembrance of thy name, And to the faith of better times commend Thy loyal upright life, and gallant end. Nomen et arma locum servant, te, amice, nequivi Here, take again thy sackcloth! and thank heav'n Thy courtship hath not kill'd me; Is't not even Whether we die by piecemeal, or at once? Since both but ruin, why then for the nonce Didst husband my afflictions, and cast o'er Me this forc'd hurdle to inflame the score? Had I near London in this rug been seen Without doubt I had executed been For some bold Irish spy, and 'cross a sledge Had lain mess'd up for their four gates and bridge. When first I bore it, my oppressd feet Would needs persuade me 'twas some leaden sheet; Such deep impressions, and such dangerous holes Were made, that I began to doubt my soles, And ev'ry step so near necessity Devoutly wish'd some honest cobbler by; Seem'd circumcis'd, but had a Gentile shag. Hadst thou been with me on that day, when we Left craggy Biston, and the fatal Dee, When beaten with fresh storms and late mishap It shar'd the office of a cloak, and cap, To see how 'bout my clouded head it stood Like a thick turban, or some lawyer's hood, While the stiff, hollow pleats on ev'ry side Like conduit-pipes rain'd from the bearded hide: I know thou wouldst in spite of that day's fate Let loose thy mirth at my new shape and state, And with a shallow smile or two profess Some Saracen had lost the clouted dress. Didst ever see the good wife as they say March in her short cloak on the christ'ning day, With what soft motions she salutes the church, And leaves the bedrid mother in the lurch; Just so jogg'd I, while my dull horse did trudge Like a circuit-beast, plagu'd with a gouty judge. But this was civil. I have since known more And worser pranks: one night as heretofore Th' hast known for want of change a thing which I And Bias us'd before me I did lie Pure Adamite, and simply for that end Resolv'd, and made this for my bosom-friend. O that thou hadst been there next morn, that I Might teach thee new Micro-cosmo-graphy! Thou wouldst have ta'en me, as I naked stood, For one of the seven pillars before the flood. Such characters and hieroglyphics were In one night worn, that thou mightst justly swear I'd slept in cere-cloth, or at Bedlam, where The madmen lodge in straw. I'll not forbear To tell thee all; his wild impress and tricks Like Speed's old Britons made me look, or Picts; His villanous, biting, wire-embraces Had seal'd in me more strange forms and faces Than children see in dreams, or thou hast read In arras, puppet-plays, and gingerbread, With angled schemes, and crosses that bred fear Of being handled by some conjurer; And nearer, thou wouldst think such strokes were drawn I'd been some rough statue of Fetter-lane. Nay, I believe, had I that instant been By surgeons or apothecaries seen, They had condemned my raz'd skin to be Some walking herbal, or anatomy. But thanks to th' day! 'tis off. I'd now advise Thee, friend, to put this piece to merchandise. The pedlars of our age have business yet, And gladly would against the Fair-day fit Themselves with such a roof, that can secure Their wares from dogs and cats rained in shower. It shall perform; or if this will not do 'Twill take the ale-wives sure; 'twill make them two Fine rooms of one, and spread upon a stick Is a partition, without lime or brick. Horn'd obstinacy! how my heart doth fret To think what mouths and elbows it would set Seen King Harry's chapel at Westminster, Where in their dusty gowns of brass and stone The judges lie, and mark'd you how each one, In sturdy marble-pleats about the knee, Bears up to show his legs and symmetry? Just so would this, that I think't weav'd upon Some stiffneck'd Brownist's exercising loom. O that thou hadst it when this juggling fate Of soldiery first seiz'd me! at what rate Would I have bought it then; what was there but I would have giv'n for the compendious hut? I do not doubt but if the weight could please 'Twould guard me better than a Lapland-lease. Or a German shirt with enchanted lint Stuff'd through, and th' devil's beard and face weav'd in't. But I have done. And think not, friend, that I This freedom took to jeer thy courtesy. I thank thee for't, and I believe my Muse So known to thee, thou'lt not suspect abuse. She did this, 'cause perhaps thy love paid thus Might with my thanks outlive thy cloak, and us. I knew thee not, nor durst attendance strive, Label to wit, verser remonstrative, And in some suburb-page scandal to thine Like Lent before a Christmas scatter mine. This speaks thee not, since at the utmost rate Such remnants from thy piece entreat their date; Nor can I dub the copy, or afford Titles to swell the rear of verse with lord; Nor politicly big, to inch low fame, Stretch in the glories of a stranger's name, And clip those bays I court; weak striver I, But a faint echo unto poetry. I have not clothes t'adopt me, nor must sit For plush and velvet's sake, esquire of wit. Yet modesty these crosses would improve, And rags near thee, some reverence may move. I did believe great Beaumont being dead Thy widow'd Muse slept on his flow'ry bed; But I am richly cozen'd, and can see Wit transmigrates: his spirit stay'd with thee; Which, doubly advantag'd by thy single pen, In life and death now treads the stage again. And thus are we freed from that dearth of wit Which starv'd the land, since into schisms split, Wherein th' hast done so much, we must needs guess Wit's last edition is now i' th' press. For thou hast drain'd invention, and he That writes hereafter, doth but pillage thee. But thou hast plots; and will not the Kirk strain At the designs of such a tragic brain? Will they themselves think safe, when they shall see Thy most abominable policy? Will not the Ears assemble, and think't fit Their Synod fast and pray against thy wit? But they'll not tire in such an idle quest; Thou dost but kill, and circumvent in jest; And when thy anger'd Muse swells to a blow 'Tis but for Field's, or Swansted's overthrow. Yet shall these conquests of thy bays outlive Their Scottish zeal, and compacts made to grieve The peace of spirits: and when such deeds fail Of their foul ends, a fair name is thy bail. But happy thou! ne'er saw'st these storms, our air Teem'd with even in thy time, though seeming fair. Thy gentle soul, meant for the shade and ease, Withdrew betimes into the Land of Peace. So nested in some hospitable shore The hermit-angler, when the mid-seas roar, Packs up his lines, and ere the tempest raves Retires, and leaves his station to the waves. Thus thou died'st almost with our peace, and we This breathing time thy last fair issue see, Which I think such if needless ink not soil So choice a Muse others are but thy foil. This, or that age may write, but never see A wit that dares run parallel with thee. True, Ben must live! but bate him, and thou hast Undone all future wits, and match'd the past. I did but see thee! and how vain it is To vex thee for it with remonstrances, Though things in fashion; let those judge, who sit Their twelve pence out, to clap their hands at wit I fear to sin thus near thee; for great saint! 'Tis known true beauty hath no need of paint. Yet, since a label fix'd to thy fair hearse Is all the mode, and tears put into verse Can teach posterity our present grief And their own loss, but never give relief; I'll tell them and a truth which needs no pass That wit in Cartwright at her zenith was. Arts, fancy, language, all conven'd in thee, With those grand miracles which deify The old world's writings, kept yet from the fire Because they force these worst times to admire. Thy matchless genius, in all thou didst write, Like the sun, wrought with such staid heat and light, That not a line to the most critic he Offends with flashes, or obscurity. When thou the wild of humours track'st, thy pen So imitates that motley stock in men, As if thou hadst in all their bosoms been, And seen those leopards that lurk within. The am'rous youth steals from thy courtly page His vow'd address, the soldier his brave rage; And those soft beauteous readers whose looks can Make some men poets, and make any man A lover, when thy slave but seems to die, Turn all his mourners, and melt at the eye. Thus thou thy thoughts hast dress'd in such a strain As doth not only speak, but rule and reign; Nor are those bodies they assum'd dark clouds, Or a thick bark, but clear, transparent shrouds, Which who looks on, the rays so strongly beat They'll brush and warm him with a quick'ning heat; So souls shine at the eyes, and pearls display Through the loose crystal-streams a glance of day. But what's all this unto a royal test? Thou art the man whom great Charles so express'd! Then let the crowd refrain their needless hum, Blessings as rich and fragrant crown your heads As the mild heav'n on roses sheds, When at their cheeks like pearls they wear The clouds that court them in a tear! And may they be fed from above By Him which first ordain'd your love! Fresh as the hours may all your pleasures be, And healthful as eternity! Sweet as the flowers' first breath, and close As th' unseen spreadings of the rose, When he unfolds his curtain'd head, And makes his bosom the sun's bed! Soft as yourselves run your whole lives, and clear As your own glass, or what shines there! Smooth as heav'n's face, and bright as he When without mask or tiffany! In all your time not one jar meet But peace as silent as his feet! Like the day's warmth may all your comforts be, Untoil'd for, and serene as he, Yet free and full as is that sheaf Of sunbeams gilding ev'ry leaf, When now the tyrant-heat expires And his cool'd locks breathe milder fires! And as those parcell'd glories he doth shed Are the fair issues of his head, Which, ne'er so distant, are soon known By th' heat and lustre for his own; So may each branch of yours we see Your copies and our wonders be! And when no more on earth you must remain, Invited hence to heav'n again, Then may your virtuous, virgin-flames Shine in those heirs of your fair names, And teach the world that mystery, Yourselves in your posterity! So you to both worlds shall rich presents bring, And, gather'd up to heav'n, leave here a spring. I knew it would be thus! and my just fears Of thy great spirit are improv'd to tears. Yet flow these not from any base distrust Of a fair name, or that thy honour must Confin'd to those cold relics sadly sit In the same cell an obscure anchorite. Such low distempers murder; they that must Abuse thee so, weep not, but wound thy dust. But I past such dim mourners can descry Thy fame above all clouds of obloquy, And like the sun with his victorious rays Charge through that darkness to the last of days. 'Tis true, fair manhood hath a female eye, And tears are beauteous in a victory, Nor are we so high-proof, but grief will find Through all our guards a way to wound the mind; But in thy fall what adds the brackish sum More than a blot unto thy martyrdom? Which scorns such wretched suffrages, and stands More by thy single worth than our whole bands. Yet could the puling tribute rescue ought In this sad loss, or wert thou to be brought Back here by tears, I would in any wise Pay down the sum, or quite consume my eyes. Thou fell'st our double ruin; and this rent Forc'd in thy life shak'd both the Church and tent. Learning in others steals them from the van, And basely wise emasculates the man, But lodg'd in thy brave soul the bookish feat Serv'd only as the light unto thy heat. Thus when some quitted action, to their shame, And only got a discreet coward's name, Thou with thy blood mad'st purchase of renown, And died'st the glory of the sword and gown. Thy blood hath hallow'd Pomfret, and this blow Profan'd before hath church'd the Castle now. Nor is't a common valour we deplore, But such as with fifteen a hundred bore, And lightning-like not coop'd within a wall In storms of fire and steel fell on them all. Thou wert no woolsack soldier, nor of those Whose courage lies in winking at their foes, That live at loopholes, and consume their breath On match or pipes, and sometimes peep at death; No, it were sin to number these with thee, But that thus pois'd our loss we better see. The fair and open valour was thy shield, And thy known station, the defying field. Yet these in thee I would not virtues call, But that this age must know that thou hadst all. Those richer graces that adorn'd thy mind Like stars of the first magnitude, so shin'd, That if oppos'd unto these lesser lights All we can say is this, they were fair nights. Thy piety and learning did unite, And though with sev'ral beams made up one light, And such thy judgment was, that I dare swear Whole councils might as soon and synods err. But all these now are out! and as some star Hurl'd in diurnal motions from far, And seen to droop at night, is vainly said To fall and find an occidental bed, Though in that other world what we judge West Proves elevation, and a new, fresh East; So though our weaker sense denies us sight, And bodies cannot trace the spirit's flight, We know those graces to be still in thee, But wing'd above us to eternity. Since then thus flown thou art so much refin'd That we can only reach thee with the mind, I will not in this dark and narrow glass Let thy scant shadow for perfections pass, But leave thee to be read more high, more quaint, In thy own blood a soldier and a saint. We thank you, worthy Sir, that now we see MALVEZZI languag'd like our infancy, And can without suspicion entertain This foreign statesman to our breast or brain; You have enlarg'd his praise, and from your store By this edition made his worth the more. Thus by your learnd hand amidst the coil Outlandish plants thrive in our thankless soil, And wise men after death, by a strange fate, Lie leiger here, and beg to serve our State. Italy now, though mistress of the bays, Waits on this wreath, proud of a foreign praise; For, wise Malvezzi, thou didst lie before Confin'd within the language of one shore, And like those stars which near the poles do steer Were't but in one part of the globe seen clear. Provence and Naples were the best and most Thou couldst shine in; fix'd to that single coast, Perhaps some cardinal, to be thought wise, And honest too, would ask, what was thy price? Then thou must pack to Rome, where thou mightst lie Ere thou shouldst have new clothes eternally, For though so near the sev'n hills, ne'ertheless Thou cam'st to Antwerp for thy Roman dress. But now thou art come hither, thou mayst run Through any clime as well known as the sun, And in thy sev'ral dresses, like the year, Challenge acquaintance with each peopled sphere. Come then, rare politicians of the time, Brains of some standing, elders in our clime, See here the method. A wise, solid State Is quick in acting, friendly in debate, Joint in advice, in resolutions just, Mild in success, true to the common trust. It cements ruptures, and by gentle hand Allays the heat and burnings of a land; Religion guides it, and in all the tract Designs so twist, that Heav'n confirms the act. If from these lists you wander as you steer, Look back, and catechize your actions here. These are the marks to which true statesmen tend, And greatness here with goodness hath one end. Sees not my friend, what a deep snow Candies our country's woody brow? The yielding branch his load scarce bears, Oppress'd with snow and frozen tears; All bound up in an icy coat. Let us meet then! and while this world In wild eccentrics now is hurl'd, Keep we, like nature, the same key, And walk in our forefathers' way. Why any more cast we an eye On what may come, not what is nigh? Why vex ourselves with fear, or hope And cares beyond our horoscope? Who into future times would peer, Looks oft beyond his term set here, And cannot go into those grounds But through a churchyard, which them bounds. Sorrows and sighs and searches spend And draw our bottom to an end, But discreet joys lengthen the lease, Without which life were a disease; And who this age a mourner goes, Doth with his tears but feed his foes Say, witty fair one, from what sphere Flow these rich numbers you shed here? For sure such incantations come A strain, whose measures gently meet Like virgin-lovers or Time's feet; Where language smiles, and accents rise As quick and pleasing as your eyes; The poem smooth, and in each line Soft as yourself, yet masculine; Where not coarse trifles blot the page With matter borrow'd from the age, But thoughts as innocent and high As angels have, or saints that die. These raptures when I first did see New miracles in poetry, And by a hand their good would miss His bays and fountains but to kiss, My weaker genius cross to fashion Slept in a silent admiration: A rescue, by whose grave disguise Pretenders oft have pass'd for wise. And yet as pilgrims humbly touch Those shrines to which they bow so much, And clouds in courtship flock, and run To be the mask unto the sun, So I concluded it was true I might at distance worship you, A Persian votary, and say It was your light show'd me the way. So loadstones guide the duller steel, And high perfections are the wheel Which moves the less, for gifts divine Are strung upon a vital line, Which, touch'd by you, excites in all Affections epidemical. And this made me a truth most fit Add my weak echo to your wit; Which pardon, Lady, for assays Obscure as these might blast your bays; As common hands soil flow'rs, and make That dew they wear weep the mistake. But I'll wash off the stain, and vow No laurel grows but for your brow. Youth, beauty, virtue, innocence, Heav'n's royal and select expense, With virgin-tears and sighs divine Sit here the genii of this shrine; Where now thy fair soul wing'd away They guard the casket where she lay. Thou hadst, ere thou the light couldst see, Sorrows laid up and stor'd for thee; Thou suck'dst in woes, and the breasts lent Their milk to thee but to lament; Thy portion here was grief, thy years Distill'd no other rain but tears, Tears without noise, but understood As loud and shrill as any blood. Thou seem'st a rosebud born in snow, A flower of purpose sprung to bow To headless tempests, and the rage Of an incensd, stormy age. Others, ere their afflictions grow, Are tim'd and season'd for the blow, But thine, as rheums the tend'rest part, Fell on a young and harmless heart. And yet, as balm-trees gently spend Their tears for those that do them rend, So mild and pious thou wert seen, Though full of suff'rings; free from spleen, Thou didst not murmur, nor revile, But drank'st thy wormwood with a smile. As envious eyes blast and infect, And cause misfortunes by aspct, So thy sad stars dispens'd to thee No influx but calamity; They view'd thee with eclipsd rays, And but the back side of bright days. These were the comforts she had here, As by an unseen Hand 'tis clear, Which now she reads, and, smiling, wears A crown with Him who wipes off tears. Well, we are rescued! and by thy rare pen Poets shall live, when princes die like men. Th' hast clear'd the prospect to our harmless hill, Of late years clouded with imputed ill, And the soft, youthful couples there may move, As chaste as stars converse and smile above. Th' hast taught their language and their love to flow Calm as rose-leaves, and cool as virgin-snow, Which doubly feasts us, being so refin'd, They both delight and dignify the mind; Like to the wat'ry music of some spring, Whose pleasant flowings at once wash and sing. And where before heroic poems were Made up of spirits, prodigies, and fear, And show'd through all the melancholy flight Like some dark region overcast with night, As if the poet had been quite dismay'd, While only giants and enchantments sway'd; Thou like the sun, whose eye brooks no disguise, Hast chas'd them hence, and with discoveries So rare and learnd fill'd the place, that we Those fam'd grandezas find outdone by thee, And underfoot see all those vizards hurl'd Which bred the wonder of the former world. 'Twas dull to sit, as our forefathers did, At crumbs and voiders, and because unbid, Refrain wise appetite. This made thy fire Break through the ashes of thy aged sire, To lend the world such a convincing light As shows his fancy darker than his sight. Nor was't alone the bars and length of days Though those gave strength and stature to his bays Encounter'd thee, but what's an old complaint And kills the fancy, a forlorn restraint. How couldst thou, mur'd in solitary stones, Dress Birtha's smiles, though well thou mightst her groans? And, strangely eloquent, thyself divide 'Twixt sad misfortunes and a bloomy bride? Through all the tenour of thy ample song, Spun from thy own rich store, and shar'd among Those fair adventurers, we plainly see Th' imputed gifts inherent are in thee. Then live for ever and by high desert In thy own mirror, matchless Gondibert, And in bright Birtha leave thy love enshrin'd Fresh as her em'rald, and fair as her mind, While all confess thee as they ought to do The prince of poets, and of lovers too. This is the day blithe god of sack which we, If I mistake not, consecrate to thee, When the soft rose we marry to the bays, And, warm'd with thy own wine, rehearse thy praise; 'Mongst whom while to thy poet fate gave way I have been held no small part of the day. But now, dull'd with the cold Bear's frozen seat, Sarmatia holds me, and the warlike Gete. My former life, unlike to this my last, With Rome's best wits of thy full cup did taste, Who since have seen the savage Pontic band, And all the choler of the sea and land. Whether sad chance or Heav'n hath this design'd, And at my birth some fatal planet shin'd, Of right thou shouldst the sisters' knots undo, And free thy votary and poet too; Or are you gods like us in such a state As cannot alter the decrees of fate? I know with much ado thou didst obtain Thy jovial godhead, and on earth thy pain Was no whit less, for, wand'ring, thou didst run To the Getes too, and snow-weeping Strymon, With Persia, Ganges, and whatever streams The thirsty Moor drinks in the mid-day beams. But thou wert twice-born, and the Fates to thee To make all sure doubled thy misery. My sufferings too are many if it be Held safe for me to boast adversity Nor was't a common blow, but from above, Like his that died for imitating Jove; Which, when thou heardst, a ruin so divine And mother-like should make thee pity mine, And on this day, which poets unto thee Crown with full bowls, ask what's become of me? Help, buxom god, then! so may thy lov'd vine Swarm with the num'rous grape, and big with wine Load the kind elm, and so thy orgies be With priests' loud shouts and satyrs' kept to thee! So may in death Lycurgus ne'er be blest, Nor Pentheus' wand'ring ghost find any rest! And so for ever bright thy chief desires May thy wife's crown outshine the lesser fires! If but now, mindful of my love to thee, Thou wilt, in what thou canst, my helper be. You gods have commerce with yourselves; try then If Csar will restore me Rome again. And you, my trusty friends the jolly crew Of careless poets! when, without me, you Perform this day's glad myst'ries, let it be Your first appeal unto his deity, And let one of you touch'd with my sad name Mixing his wine with tears, lay down the same, And sighing to the rest this thought commend, O! where is Ovid now, our banish'd friend? This do, if in your breasts I e'er deserv'd So large a share, nor spitefully reserv'd, Nor basely sold applause, or with a brow Condemning others, did myself allow. And may your happier wits grow loud with fame As you my best of friends! preserve my name. You have consum'd my language, and my pen, Incens'd with begging, scorns to write again. You grant, you knew my suit: my Muse and I Had taught it you in frequent elegy. That I believe yet seal'd you have divin'd Our repetitions, and forestall'd my mind, So that my thronging elegies and I Have made you more than poets prophesy. But I am now awak'd; forgive my dream Which made me cross the proverb and the stream, And pardon, friends, that I so long have had Such good thoughts of you; I am not so mad As to continue them. You shall no more Complain of troublesome verse, or write o'er How I endanger you, and vex my wife With the sad legends of a banish'd life. I'll bear these plagues myself: for I have pass'd Through greater ones, and can as well at last These petty crosses. 'Tis for some young beast To kick his bands, or wish his neck releas'd From the sad yoke. Know then, that as for me Whom Fate hath us'd to such calamity, I scorn her spite and yours, and freely dare The highest ills your malice can prepare. 'Twas Fortune threw me hither, where I now Rude Getes and Thrace see, with the snowy brow Of cloudy mus, and if she decree Her sportive pilgrim's last bed here must be, I am content; nay, more, she cannot do That act which I would not consent unto. I can delight in vain hopes, and desire That state more than her change and smiles; then high'r I hug a strong despair, and think it brave To baffle faith, and give those hopes a grave. Have you not seen cur'd wounds enlarg'd, and he That with the first wave sinks, yielding to th' free Waters, without th' expense of arms or breath, Hath still the easiest and the quickest death. Why nurse I sorrows then? why these desires Of changing Scythia for the sun and fires Of some calm kinder air? what did bewitch My frantic hopes to fly so vain a pitch, And thus outrun myself? Madman! could I Suspect fate had for me a courtesy? These errors grieve: and now I must forget Those pleas'd ideas I did frame and set Unto myself, with many fancied springs And groves, whose only loss new sorrow brings. And yet I would the worst of fate endure, Ere you should be repuls'd, or less secure. But base, low souls! you left me not for this, But 'cause you durst not. Csar could not miss Of such a trifle, for I know that he Scorns the cheap triumphs of my misery. Then since degen'rate friends not he, but you Cancel my hopes, and make afflictions new, You shall confess, and fame shall tell you, I At Ister dare as well as Tiber die. Shall I complain, or not? or shall I mask Thy hateful name, and in this bitter task Master my just impatience, and write down Thy crime alone, and leave the rest unknown? Or wilt thou the succeeding years should see And teach thy person to posterity? No, hope it not; for know, most wretched man, 'Tis not thy base and weak detraction can Buy thee a poem, nor move me to give Thy name the honour in my verse to live. Whilst yet my ship did with no storms dispute, And temp'rate winds fed with a calm salute My prosp'rous sails, thou wert the only man That with me then an equal fortune ran; But now since angry heav'n with clouds and night Stifled those sunbeams, thou hast ta'en thy flight; Thou know'st I want thee, and art merely gone To shun that rescue I reli'd upon; Nay, thou dissemblest too, and dost disclaim Not only my acquaintance, but my name. Yet know though deaf to this that I am he Whose years and love had the same infancy With thine, thy deep familiar that did share Souls with thee, and partake thy joys or care; Whom the same roof lodg'd, and my Muse those nights So solemnly endear'd to her delights. But now, perfidious traitor, I am grown The abject of thy breast, not to be known In that false closet more; nay, thou wilt not So much as let me know I am forgot. If thou wilt say thou didst not love me, then Thou didst dissemble: or if love again, Why now inconstant? Came the crime from me That wrought this change? Sure, if no justice be Of my side, thine must have it. Why dost hide Thy reasons then? For me, I did so guide Myself and actions, that I cannot see What could offend thee, but my misery. 'Las! if thou wouldst not from thy store allow Some rescue to my wants, at least I know Thou couldst have writ, and with a line or two Reliev'd my famish'd eye, and eas'd me so. I know not what to think! and yet I hear, Not pleas'd with this, th'art witty, and dost jeer. Bad man! thou hast in this those tears kept back I could have shed for thee, shouldst thou but lack. Know'st not that Fortune on a globe doth stand, Whose upper slipp'ry part without command Turns lowest still? the sportive leaves and wind Are but dull emblems of her fickle mind. In the whole world there's nothing I can see Will throughly parallel her ways but thee. All that we hold hangs on a slender twine, And our best states by sudden chance decline. Who hath not heard of Cr sus' proverb'd gold, Yet knows his foe did him a pris'ner hold? He that once aw'd Sicilia's proud extent By a poor art could famine scarce prevent; And mighty Pompey, ere he made an end, Was glad to beg his slave to be his friend. Nay, he that had so oft Rome's consul been, And forc'd Jugurtha and the Cimbrians in, Great Marius! with much want and more disgrace, In a foul marsh was glad to hide his face. A Divine hand sways all mankind, and we Of one short hour have not the certainty. Hadst thou one day told me the time should be When the Getes' bows, and th' Euxine I should see, I should have check'd thy madness, and have thought Th' hadst need of all Anticyra in a draught. And yet 'tis come to pass! nor, though I might Some things foresee, could I procure a sight Of my whole destiny, and free my state From those eternal, higher ties of fate. Leave then thy pride, and though now brave and high, Think thou mayst be as poor and low as I. Dearest! if you those fair eyes wond'ring stick On this strange character, know I am sick; Sick in the skirts of the lost world, where I Breathe hopeless of all comforts, but to die. What heart think'st thou? have I in this sad seat, Tormented 'twixt the Sauromate and Gete? Nor air nor water please: their very sky Looks strange and unaccustom'd to my eye; I scarce dare breathe it, and, I know not how, The earth that bears me shows unpleasant now. Nor diet here's, nor lodging for my ease, Nor any one that studies a disease; No friend to comfort me, none to defray With smooth discourse the charges of the day. All tir'd alone I lie, and thus whate'er Is absent, and at Rome, I fancy here. But when thou com'st, I blot the airy scroll, And give thee full possession of my soul. Thee absent I embrace, thee only voice. And night and day belie a husband's joys. Nay, of thy name so oft I mention make That I am thought distracted for thy sake. When my tir'd spirits fail, and my sick heart Draws in that fire which actuates each part, If any say, th'art come! I force my pain, And hope to see thee gives me life again. Thus I for thee, whilst thou perhaps more blest, Careless of me dost breathe all peace and rest, Which yet I think not, for dear soul! too well Know I thy grief, since my first woes befell. But if strict Heav'n my stock of days hath spun, And with my life my error will be gone, How easy then O Csar! were't for thee To pardon one, that now doth cease to be? That I might yield my native air this breath, And banish not my ashes after death. Would thou hadst either spar'd me until dead, Or with my blood redeem'd my absent head! Thou shouldst have had both freely, but O! thou Wouldst have me live to die an exile now. And must I then from Rome so far meet death, And double by the place my loss of breath? Nor in my last of hours on my own bed In the sad conflict rest my dying head? Nor my soul's whispers the last pledge of life, Mix with the tears and kisses of a wife? My last words none must treasure, none will rise And with a tear seal up my vanquish'd eyes; Without these rites I die, distress'd in all The splendid sorrows of a funeral; Unpitied, and unmourn'd for, my sad head In a strange land goes friendless to the dead. When thou hear'st this, O! how thy faithful soul Will sink, whilst grief doth ev'ry part control! How often wilt thou look this way, and cry, O! where is't yonder that my love doth lie? Yet spare these tears, and mourn not thou for me, Long since dear heart! have I been dead to thee. Think then I died, when thee and Rome I lost, That death to me more grief than this hath cost. Now, if thou canst but thou canst not best wife, Rejoice, my cares are ended with my life. At least, yield not to sorrows, frequent use Should make these miseries to thee no news. And here I wish my soul died with my breath, And that no part of me were free from death; For, if it be immortal, and outlives The body, as Pythagoras believes, Betwixt these Sarmates' ghosts, a Roman I Shall wander, vex'd to all eternity. But thou for after death I shall be free Fetch home these bones, and what is left of me; A few flow'rs give them, with some balm, and lay Them in some suburb grave, hard by the way; And to inform posterity, who's there, This sad inscription let my marble wear; Here lies the soft-soul'd lecturer of love, Whose envi'd wit did his own ruin prove. But thou, whoe'er thou be'st, that, passing by, Lend'st to this sudden stone a hasty eye, If e'er thou knew'st of love the sweet disease, Grudge not to say, May Ovid rest in peace! This for my tomb: but in my books they'll see More strong and lasting monuments of me, Which I believe though fatal will afford An endless name unto their ruin'd lord. And now thus gone, it rests, for love of me, Thou show'st some sorrow to my memory; Thy funeral off'rings to my ashes bear, With wreaths of cypress bath'd in many a tear. Though nothing there but dust of me remain, Yet shall that dust perceive thy pious pain. But I have done, and my tir'd, sickly head, Though I would fain write more, desires the bed; Take then this word perhaps my last to tell, Which though I want, I wish it thee, farewell! In those bless'd fields of everlasting air Where to a myrtle grove the souls repair Of deceas'd lovers the sad, thoughtful ghosts Of injur'd ladies meet, where each accosts The other with a sigh, whose very breath Would break a heart, and kind souls love in death. A thick wood clouds their walks, where day scarce peeps, And on each hand cypress and poppy sleeps; The drowsy rivers slumber, and springs there Blab not, but softly melt into a tear; A sickly dull air fans them, which can have, When most in force, scarce breath to build a wave. On either bank through the still shades appear A scene of pensive flow'rs, whose bosoms wear Drops of a lover's blood, the emblem'd truths Of deep despair, and love-slain kings and youths. The Hyacinth, and self-enamour'd boy Narcissus flourish there, with Venus' joy, The spruce Adonis, and that prince whose flow'r Hath sorrow languag'd on him to this hour; All sad with love they hang their heads, and grieve As if their passions in each leaf did live; And here alas! these soft-soul'd ladies stray, And O! too late! treason in love betray. Her blasted birth sad Semele repeats, And with her tears would quench the thund'rer's heats, Then shakes her bosom, as if fir'd again, And fears another lightning's flaming train. The lovely Procris here bleeds, sighs, and swoons, Then wakes, and kisses him that gave her wounds. Sad Hero holds a torch forth, and doth light Her lost Leander through the waves and night, Her boatman desp'rate Sappho still admires, And nothing but the sea can quench her fires. Distracted Phdra with a restless eye Her disdain'd letters reads, then casts them by. Rare, faithful Thisbe sequest'red from these A silent, unseen sorrow doth best please; For her love's sake and last good-night poor she Walks in the shadow of a mulberry. Near her young Canace with Dido sits, A lovely couple, but of desp'rate wits; Both di'd alike, both pierc'd their tender breasts, This with her father's sword, that with her guest's. Within the thickest textures of the grove Diana in her silver beams doth rove; Her crown of stars the pitchy air invades, And with a faint light gilds the silent shades, Whilst her sad thoughts, fix'd on her sleepy lover, To Latmos hill and his retirements move her. A thousand more through the wide, darksome wood Feast on their cares, the maudlin lover's food; For grief and absence do but edge desire, And death is fuel to a lover's fire. To see these trophies of his wanton bow, Cupid comes in, and all in triumph now Rash unadvisd boy! disperseth round The sleepy mists; his wings and quiver wound With noise the quiet air. This sudden stir Betrays his godship, and as we from far A clouded, sickly moon observe, so they Through the false mists his eclips'd torch betray. A hot pursuit they make, and, though with care And a slow wing, he softly stems the air, Yet they as subtle now as he surround His silenc'd course, and with the thick night bound Surprise the wag. As in a dream we strive To voice our thoughts, and vainly would revive Our entranc'd tongues, but cannot speech enlarge, 'Till the soul wakes and reassumes her charge; So, joyous of their prize, they flock about And vainly swell with an imagin'd shout. Far in these shades and melancholy coasts A myrtle grows, well known to all the ghosts, Whose stretch'd top like a great man rais'd by Fate Looks big, and scorns his neighbour's low estate; His leafy arms into a green cloud twist, And on each branch doth sit a lazy mist, A fatal tree, and luckless to the gods, Where for disdain in life Love's worst of odds The queen of shades, fair Proserpine, did rack The sad Adonis: hither now they pack This little god, where, first disarm'd, they bind His skittish wings, then both his hands behind His back they tie, and thus secur'd at last, The peevish wanton to the tree make fast. Here at adventure, without judge or jury, He is condemn'd, while with united fury They all assail him. As a thief at bar Left to the law, and mercy of his star, Hath bills heap'd on him, and is question'd there By all the men that have been robb'd that year; So now whatever Fate or their own will Scor'd up in life, Cupid must pay the bill. Their servant's falsehood, jealousy, disdain, And all the plagues that abus'd maids can feign, Are laid on him, and then to heighten spleen, Their own deaths crown the sum. Press'd thus between His fair accusers, 'tis at last decreed He by those weapons, that they died, should bleed. One grasps an airy sword, a second holds Illusive fire, and in vain wanton folds Belies a flame; others, less kind, appear To let him blood, and from the purple tear Create a rose. But Sappho all this while Harvests the air, and from a thicken'd pile Of clouds like Leucas top spreads underneath A sea of mists; the peaceful billows breathe Without all noise, yet so exactly move They seem to chide, but distant from above Reach not the ear, and thus prepar'd at once She doth o'erwhelm him with the airy sconce. Amidst these tumults, and as fierce as they, Venus steps in, and without thought or stay Invades her son; her old disgrace is cast Into the bill, when Mars and she made fast In their embraces were expos'd to all The scene of gods, stark naked in their fall. Nor serves a verbal penance, but with haste From her fair brow O happy flow'rs so plac'd! She tears a rosy garland, and with this Whips the untoward boy; they gently kiss His snowy skin, but she with angry haste Doubles her strength, until bedew'd at last With a thin bloody sweat, their innate red, As if griev'd with the act grew pale and dead. This laid their spleen; and now kind souls no more They'll punish him; the torture that he bore Seems greater than his crime; with joint consent Fate is made guilty, and he innocent. As in a dream with dangers we contest, And fictious pains seem to afflict our rest, So, frighted only in these shades of night, Cupid got loose stole to the upper light, Where ever since for malice unto these The spiteful ape doth either sex displease. But O! that had these ladies been so wise To keep his arms, and give him but his eyes! I whose first year flourish'd with youthful verse, In slow, sad numbers now my grief rehearse. A broken style my sickly lines afford, And only tears give weight unto my words. Yet neither fate nor force my Muse could fright, The only faithful consort of my flight. Thus what was once my green years' greatest glory, Is now my comfort, grown decay'd and hoary; For killing cares th' effects of age spurr'd on, That grief might find a fitting mansion; O'er my young head runs an untimely grey, And my loose skin shrinks at my blood's decay. Happy the man, whose death in prosp'rous years Strikes not, nor shuns him in his age and tears! But O! how deaf is she to hear the cry Of th' oppress'd soul, or shut the weeping eye! While treach'rous Fortune with slight honours fed My first estate, she almost drown'd my head, And now since clouded thus she hides those rays, Life adds unwelcom'd length unto my days. Why then, my friends, judg'd you my state so good? He that may fall once, never firmly stood. O in what haste, with clouds and night Eclips'd, and having lost her light, The dull soul whom distraction rends Into outward darkness tends! How often by these mists made blind Have earthly cares oppress'd the mind! This soul, sometimes wont to survey The spangled Zodiac's fiery way, Saw th' early sun in roses dress'd, With the cool moon's unstable crest, And whatsoever wanton star, In various courses near or far, Pierc'd through the orbs, he could full well Track all her journey, and would tell Her mansions, turnings, rise and fall, By curious calculation all. Of sudden winds the hidden cause, And why the calm sea's quiet face With impetuous waves is curl'd, What spirit wheels th' harmonious world, Or why a star dropp'd in the west Is seen to rise again by east, Who gives the warm Spring temp'rate hours, Decking the Earth with spicy flow'rs, Or how it comes for man's recruit That Autumn yields both grape and fruit, With many other secrets, he Could show the cause and mystery. But now that light is almost out, And the brave soul lies chain'd about With outward cares, whose pensive weight Sinks down her eyes from their first height. And clean contrary to her birth Pores on this vile and foolish Earth. Whose calm soul in a settled state Kicks under foot the frowns of Fate, And in his fortunes, bad or good, Keeps the same temper in his blood; Not him the flaming clouds above, Nor tna's fiery tempests move; No fretting seas from shore to shore, Boiling with indignation o'er, Nor burning thunderbolt that can A mountain shake, can stir this man. Dull cowards then! why should we start To see these tyrants act their part? Nor hope, nor fear what may befall, And you disarm their malice all. But who doth faintly fear or wish, And sets no law to what is his, Hath lost the buckler, and poor elf! Makes up a chain to bind himself. O Thou great builder of this starry frame, Who fix'd in Thy eternal throne doth tame The rapid spheres, and lest they jar Hast giv'n a law to ev'ry star. Thou art the cause that now the moon With fall orb dulls the stars, and soon Again grows dark, her light being done, The nearer still she's to the sun. Thou in the early hours of night Mak'st the cool evening-star shine bright, And at sun-rising 'cause the least Look pale and sleepy in the east. Thou, when the leaves in winter stray, Appoint'st the sun a shorter way, And in the pleasant summer light, With nimble hours dost wing the night. Thy hand the various year quite through Discreetly tempers, that what now The north-wind tears from ev'ry tree In spring again restor'd we see. Then what the winter stars between The furrows in mere seed have seen, The dog-star since grown up and born Hath burnt in stately, full-ear'd corn. Thus by creation's law controll'd All things their proper stations hold, Observing as Thou didst intend Why they were made, and for what end. Only human actions Thou Hast no care of, but to the flow And ebb of Fortune leav'st them all. Hence th' innocent endures that thrall Due to the wicked; whilst alone They sit possessors of his throne. The just are kill'd, and virtue lies Buried in obscurities; And which of all things is most sad The good man suffers by the bad. No perjuries, nor damn'd pretence Colour'd with holy, lying sense Can them annoy, but when they mind To try their force, which most men find, They from the highest sway of things Can pull down great and pious kings. O then at length, thus loosely hurl'd, Look on this miserable world, Whoe'er Thou art, that from above Dost in such order all things move! And let not man of divine art Not the least, nor vilest part By casual evils thus bandied, be The sport of Fate's obliquity. But with that faith Thou guid'st the heaven Settle this earth, and make them even. When the Crab's fierce constellation Burns with the beams of the bright sun, Then he that will go out to sow, Shall never reap, where he did plough, But instead of corn may rather The old world's diet, acorns, gather. Who the violet doth love, Must seek her in the flow'ry grove, But never when the North's cold wind The russet fields with frost doth bind. If in the spring-time to no end The tender vine for grapes we bend, We shall find none, for only still Autumn doth the wine-press fill. Thus for all things in the world's prime The wise God seal'd their proper time, Nor will permit those seasons, He Ordain'd by turns, should mingled be; Then whose wild actions out of season Cross to Nature, and her reason, Would by new ways old orders rend, Shall never find a happy end. Curtain'd with clouds in a dark night, The stars cannot send forth their light. And if a sudden southern blast The sea in rolling waves doth cast, That angry element doth boil, And from the deep with stormy coil Spews up the sands, which in short space Scatter, and puddle his curl'd face. Then those calm waters, which but now Stood clear as heaven's unclouded brow, And like transparent glass did lie Open to ev'ry searcher's eye, Look foully stirr'd and though desir'd Resist the sight, because bemir'd. So often from a high hill's brow Some pilgrim-spring is seen to flow, And in a straight line keep her course, 'Till from a rock with headlong force Some broken piece blocks up the way, And forceth all her streams astray. Then thou that with enlighten'd rays Wouldst see the truth, and in her ways Keep without error; neither fear The future, nor too much give ear To present joys; and give no scope To grief, nor much to flatt'ring hope. For when these rebels reign, the mind Is both a pris'ner, and stark blind. Fortune when with rash hands she quite turmoils The state of things, and in tempestuous foils Comes whirling like Euripus beats quite down With headlong force the highest monarch's crown, And in his place, unto the throne doth fetch The despis'd looks of some mechanic wretch: So jests at tears and miseries, is proud, And laughs to hear her vassals groan aloud. These are her sports, thus she her wheel doth drive, And plagues man with her blind prerogative; Nor is't a favour of inferior strain, If once kick'd down, she lets him rise again. If with an open, bounteous hand Wholly left at man's command Fortune should in one rich flow As many heaps on him bestow Of massy gold, as there be sands Toss'd by the waves and winds rude bands, Or bright stars in a winter night Decking their silent orbs with light; Yet would his lust know no restraints, Nor cease to weep in sad complaints. Though Heaven should his vows regard, And in a prodigal reward Return him all he could implore, Adding new honours to his store, Yet all were nothing. Goods in sight Are scorn'd, and lust in greedy flight Lays out for more; what measure then Can tame these wild desires of men? Since all we give both last and first Doth but inflame, and feed their thirst. For how can he be rich, who 'midst his store Sits sadly pining, and believes he's poor. When the sun from his rosy bed The dawning light begins to shed, The drowsy sky uncurtains round, And the but now bright stars all drown'd In one great light look dull and tame, And homage his victorious flame. Thus, when the warm Etesian wind The Earth's seal'd bosom doth unbind, Straight she her various store discloses, And purples every grove with roses; But if the South's tempestuous breath Breaks forth, those blushes pine to death. Oft in a quiet sky the deep With unmov'd waves seems fast asleep, And oft again the blust'ring North In angry heaps provokes them forth. If then this world, which holds all nations, Suffers itself such alterations, That not this mighty massy frame, Nor any part of it can claim One certain course, why should man prate, Or censure the designs of Fate? Why from frail honours, and goods lent Should he expect things permanent? Since 'tis enacted by Divine decree That nothing mortal shall eternal be. Who wisely would for his retreat Build a secure and lasting seat, Where stov'd in silence he may sleep Beneath the wind, above the deep; Let him th' high hills leave on one hand, And on the other the false sand. The first to winds lies plain and even, From all the blust'ring points of heaven; The other, hollow and unsure, No weight of building will endure. Avoiding then the envied state Of buildings bravely situate, Remember thou thyself to lock Within some low neglected rock. There when fierce heaven in thunder chides, And winds and waves rage on all sides, Thou happy in the quiet sense Of thy poor cell, with small expense Shall lead a life serene and fair, And scorn the anger of the air. Happy that first white age! when we Lived by the Earth's mere charity. No soft luxurious diet then Had effeminated men, No other meat, nor wine had any Than the coarse mast, or simple honey, And by the parents' care laid up Cheap berries did the children sup. No pompous wear was in those days Of gummy silks, or scarlet baize, Their beds were on some flow'ry brink, And clear spring-water was their drink. The shady pine in the sun's heat Was their cool and known retreat, For then 'twas not cut down, but stood The youth and glory of the wood. The daring sailor with his slaves Then had not cut the swelling waves, Nor for desire of foreign store Seen any but his native shore. No stirring drum had scarr'd that age, Nor the shrill trumpet's active rage, No wounds by bitter hatred made With warm blood soil'd the shining blade; For how could hostile madness arm An age of love, to public harm? When common justice none withstood, Nor sought rewards for spilling blood. O that at length our age would raise Into the temper of those days! But worse than tna's fires! debate And avarice inflame our State. Alas! who was it that first found Gold, hid of purpose under ground, That sought our pearls, and div'd to find Such precious perils for mankind! He that thirsts for glory's prize, Thinking that the top of all, Let him view th' expansd skies, And the earth's contracted ball; 'Twill shame him then: the name he wan Fills not the short walk of one man. O why vainly strive you then To shake off the bands of Fate, Though Fame through the world of men Should in all tongues your names relate, And with proud titles swell that story: The dark grave scorns your brightest glory. There with nobles beggars sway, And kings with commons share one dust. What news of Brutus at this day, Or Fabricius the just? Some rude verse, cut in stone, or lead, Keeps up the names, but they are dead. So shall you one day past reprieve Lie perhaps without a name. But if dead you think to live By this air of human fame, Know, when Time stops that posthume breath, You must endure a second death. That the world in constant force Varies her concordant course; That seeds jarring hot and cold Do the breed perpetual hold; That in his golden coach the sun Brings the rosy day still on; That the moon sways all those lights Which Hesper ushers to dark nights; That alternate tides be found The sea's ambitious waves to bound, Lest o'er the wide earth without end Their fluid empire should extend; All this frame of things that be, Love which rules heaven, land, and sea, Chains, keeps, orders as we see. This, if the reins he once cast by, All things that now by turns comply Would fall to discord, and this frame Which now by social faith they tame, And comely orders, in that fight And jar of things would perish quite. This in a holy league of peace Keeps king and people with increase; And in the sacred nuptial bands Ties up chaste hearts with willing hands; And this keeps firm without all doubt Friends by his bright instinct found out. O happy nation then were you, If love, which doth all things subdue, That rules the spacious heav'n, and brings Plenty and peace upon his wings, Might rule you too! and without guile Settle once more this floating isle! Almighty Spirit! Thou that by Set turns and changes from Thy high And glorious throne dost here below Rule all, and all things dost foreknow! Can those blind plots we here discuss Please Thee, as Thy wise counsels us? When Thou Thy blessings here doth strow, And pour on earth, we flock and flow, With joyous strife and eager care, Struggling which shall have the best share In Thy rich gifts, just as we see Children about nuts disagree. Some that a crown have got and foil'd Break it; another sees it spoil'd Ere it is gotten. Thus the world Is all to piecemeals cut, and hurl'd By factious hands. It is a ball Which Fate and force divide 'twixt all The sons of men. But, O good God! While these for dust fight, and a clod, Grant that poor I may smile, and be At rest and perfect peace with Thee! It would less vex distressd man If Fortune in the same pace ran To ruin him, as he did rise. But highest States fall in a trice; No great success held ever long; A restless fate afflicts the throng Of kings and commons, and less days Serve to destroy them than to raise. Good luck smiles once an age, but bad Makes kingdoms in a minute sad, And ev'ry hour of life we drive, Hath o'er us a prerogative. Then leave by wild impatience driv'n, And rash resents to rail at heav'n; Leave an unmanly, weak complaint That death and fate have no restraint. In the same hour that gave thee breath, Thou hadst ordain'd thy hour of death, But he lives most who here will buy, With a few tears, eternity. Let not thy youth and false delights Cheat thee of life; those heady flights But waste thy time, which posts away Like winds unseen, and swift as they. Beauty is but mere paint, whose dye With Time's breath will dissolve and fly; 'Tis wax, 'tis water, 'tis a glass, It melts, breaks, and away doth pass. 'Tis like a rose which in the dawn The air with gentle breath doth fawn And whisper to, but in the hours Of night is sullied with smart showers. Life spent is wish'd for but in vain, Nor can past years come back again. Happy the man, who in this vale Redeems his time, shutting out all Thoughts of the world, whose longing eyes Are ever pilgrims in the skies, That views his bright home, and desires To shine amongst those glorious fires! 'Tis not rich furniture and gems, With cedar roofs and ancient stems, Nor yet a plenteous, lasting flood Of gold, that makes man truly good. Leave to inquire in what fair fields A river runs which much gold yields; Virtue alone is the rich prize Can purchase stars, and buy the skies. Let others build with adamant, Or pillars of carv'd marble plant, Which rude and rough sometimes did dwell Far under earth, and near to hell. But richer much from death releas'd Shines in the fresh groves of the East The ph nix, or those fish that dwell With silver'd scales in Hiddekel. Let others with rare, various pearls Their garments dress, and in forc'd curls Bind up their locks, look big and high, And shine in robes of scarlet dye. But in my thoughts more glorious far Those native stars and speckles are Which birds wear, or the spots which we In leopards dispersd see. The harmless sheep with her warm fleece Clothes man, but who his dark heart sees Shall find a wolf or fox within, That kills the castor for his skin. Virtue alone, and nought else can A diff'rence make 'twixt beasts and man; And on her wings above the spheres To the true light his spirit bears. Nothing on earth, nothing at all Can be exempted from the thrall Of peevish weariness! The sun, Which our forefathers judg'd to run Clear and unspotted, in our days Is tax'd with sullen eclips'd rays. Whatever in the glorious sky Man sees, his rash audacious eye Dares censure it, and in mere spite At distance will condemn the light. The wholesome mornings, whose beams clear Those hills our fathers walk'd on here, We fancy not; nor the moon's light Which through their windows shin'd at night We change the air each year, and scorn Those seats in which we first were born. Some nice, affected wand'rers love Belgia's mild winters, others remove, For want of health and honesty, To summer it in Italy; But to no end; the disease still Sticks to his lord, and kindly will To Venice in a barge repair, Or coach it to Vienna's air; And then too late with home content They leave this wilful banishment. But he, whose constancy makes sure His mind and mansion, lives secure From such vain tasks, can dine and sup Where his old parents bred him up. Content no doubt! most times doth dwell In country shades, or to some cell Confines itself; and can alone Make simple straw a royal throne. If weeping eyes could wash away Those evils they mourn for night and day, Then gladly I to cure my fears But as dew feeds the growing corn, So crosses that are grown forlorn Increase with grief, tears make tears' way, And cares kept up keep cares in pay. That wretch whom Fortune finds to fear, And melting still into a tear, She strikes more boldly, but a face Silent and dry doth her amaze. Then leave thy tears, and tedious tale Of what thou dost misfortunes call. What thou by weeping think'st to ease, Doth by that passion but increase; Hard things to soft will never yield, 'Tis the dry eye that wins the field; A noble patience quells the spite Of Fortune, and disarms her quite. Flaccus, not so! that worldly he Whom in the country's shade we see Ploughing his own fields, seldom can Be justly styl'd the blessed man. That title only fits a saint, Whose free thoughts, far above restraint And weighty cares, can gladly part With house and lands, and leave the smart, Litigious troubles and loud strife Of this world for a better life. He fears no cold nor heat to blast His corn, for his accounts are cast; He sues no man, nor stands in awe Of the devouring courts of law; But all his time he spends in tears For the sins of his youthful years; Or having tasted those rich joys Of a conscience without noise, Sits in some fair shade, and doth give To his wild thoughts rules how to live. He in the evening, when on high The stars shine in the silent sky, Beholds th' eternal flames with mirth, And globes of light more large than Earth; Then weeps for joy, and through his tears Looks on the fire-enamell'd spheres, Where with his Saviour he would be Lifted above mortality. Meanwhile the golden stars do set, And the slow pilgrim leave all wet With his own tears, which flow so fast They make his sleeps light, and soon past. By this, the sun o'er night deceas'd Breaks in fresh blushes from the East, When, mindful of his former falls, With strong cries to his God he calls, And with such deep-drawn sighs doth move That He turns anger into love. In the calm Spring, when the Earth bears, And feeds on April's breath and tears, His eyes, accustom'd to the skies, Find here fresh objects, and like spies Or busy bees, search the soft flow'rs, Contemplate the green fields and bow'rs, Where he in veils and shades doth see The back parts of the Deity. Then sadly sighing says, O! how These flow'rs with hasty, stretch'd heads grow And strive for heav'n, but rooted here Lament the distance with a tear! The honeysuckles clad in white, The rose in red, point to the light; And the lilies, hollow and bleak, Look as if they would something speak; They sigh at night to each soft gale, And at the day-spring weep it all. Shall I then only wretched I! Oppress'd with earth, on earth still lie? Thus speaks he to the neighbour trees, And many sad soliloquies To springs and fountains doth impart, Seeking God with a longing heart. But if to ease his busy breast He thinks of home, and taking rest, A rural cot and common fare Are all his cordials against care. There at the door of his low cell, Under some shade, or near some well Where the cool poplar grows, his plate Of common earth without more state Expect their lord. Salt in a shell, Green cheese, thin beer, draughts that will tell No tales, a hospitable cup, With some fresh berries, do make up His healthful feast; nor doth he wish For the fat carp, or a rare dish Of Lucrine oysters; the swift quist Or pigeon sometimes if he list With the slow goose that loves the stream, Fresh, various salads, and the bean By curious palates never sought, And, to close with, some cheap unbought Dish for digestion, are the most And choicest dainties he can boast. Thus feasted, to the flow'ry groves Or pleasant rivers he removes, Where near some fair oak, hung with mast, He shuns the South's infectious blast. On shady banks sometimes he lies, Sometimes the open current tries, Where with his line and feather'd fly He sports, and takes the scaly fry. Meanwhile each hollow wood and hill Doth ring with lowings long and shrill, And shady lakes with rivers deep Echo the bleating of the sheep; The blackbird with the pleasant thrush And nightingale in ev'ry bush Choice music give, and shepherds play Unto their flock some loving lay! The thirsty reapers, in thick throngs, Return home from the field with songs, And the carts, laden with ripe corn, Come groaning to the well-stor'd barn. Nor pass we by, as the least good, A peaceful, loving neighbourhood, Whose honest wit, and chaste discourse Make none by hearing it the worse, But innocent and merry, may Help without sin to spend the day. Could now the tyrant usurer, Who plots to be a purchaser Of his poor neighbour's seat, but taste These true delights, O! with what haste And hatred of his ways, would he And those curs'd sums, which poor men borrow Had I ador'd the multitude, and thence Got an antipathy to wit and sense, And hugg'd that fate, in hope the world would grant 'Twas good affection to be ignorant; Yet the least ray of thy bright fancy seen, I had converted, or excuseless been. For each birth of thy Muse to after-times Shall expiate for all this Age's crimes. First shines thy Amoret, twice crown'd by thee, Once by thy love, next by thy poetry; Where thou the best of unions dost dispense, Truth cloth'd in wit, and Love in innocence; So that the muddy lover may learn here, No fountains can be sweet that are not clear. There Juvenal, by thee reviv'd, declares How flat man's joys are, and how mean his cares; And wisely doth upbraid the world, that they Should such a value for their ruin pay. But when thy sacred Muse diverts her quil The landscape to design of Sion's hill, As nothing else was worthy her, or thee, So we admire almost t' idolatry. What savage breast would not be rapt to find Thou fill'd with joys too great to see or count Descend'st from thence, like Moses from the Mount, And with a candid, yet unquestion'd awe Restor'st the Golden Age, when Verse was Law. Instructing us, thou so secur'st thy fame, That nothing can disturb it but my name: Nay, I have hopes that standing so near thine 'Twill lose its dross, and by degrees refine. Live! till the disabusd world consent All truths of use, of strength or ornament, Are with such harmony by thee display'd As the whole world was first by number made, And from the charming rigour thy Muse brings Learn, there's no pleasure but in serious things! Fairly design'd! to charm our civil rage With verse, and plant bays in an iron age! But hath steel'd Mars so ductible a soul, That love and poesy may it control? Yes! brave Tyrtus, as we read of old, The Grecian armies as he pleas'd could mould; They march'd to his high numbers, and did fight With that instinct and rage, which he did write. When he fell lower, they would straight retreat, Grow soft and calm, and temper their bold heat. Such magic is in Virtue! See here a young Tyrtus too, whose sweet persuasive song Can lead our spirits any way, and move To all adventures, either war or love. Then veil the bright Etesia, that choice she, Lest Mars Timander's friend his rival be. So fair a nymph, dress'd by a Muse so neat, Might warm the North, and thaw the frozen Gete. Where reverend bards of old have sate And sung the pleasant interludes of Fate, Thou takest the hereditary shade Which Nature's homely art had made, And thence thou giv'st thy Muse her swing, and she Advances to the galaxy; There with the sparkling Cowley she above Does hand in hand in graceful measures move. We grovelling mortals gaze below, And long in vain to know Her wondrous paths, her wondrous flight: In vain, alas! we grope, In vain we use our earthly telescope, We're blinded by an intermedial night. Thine eagle-Muse can only face The fiery coursers in their race, While with unequal paces we do try To bear her train aloft, and keep her company. The loud harmonious Mantuan Once charm'd the world; and here's the Uscan swan In his declining years does chime, And challenges the last remains of Time. Ages run on, and soon give o'er, They have their graves as well as we; Time swallows all that's past and more, Yet time is swallow'd in eternity: This is the only profits poets see. There thy triumphant Muse shall ride in state And lead in chains devouring Fate; Claudian's bright Ph nix she shall bring Thee an immortal offering; Nor shall my humble tributary Muse Her homage and attendance too refuse; She thrusts herself among the crowd, And joining in th' applause she strives to clap aloud Tell me no more that Nature is severe, Thou great philosopher! Lo! she has laid her vast exchequer here. Tell me no more that she has sent So much already, she is spent; Here is a vast America behind Which none but the great Silurist could find. Nature her last edition was the best, As big, as rich as all the rest: So will we here admit Another world of wit. No rude or savage fancy here shall stay The travelling reader in his way, But every coast is clear: go where he will, Virtue's the road Thalia leads him still. Long may she live, and wreath thy sacred head For this her happy resurrection from the dead. The original has flight In raine; alas! we grope . See what thou wert! by what Platonic round Art thou in thy first youth and glories found? Or from thy Muse does this retrieve accrue? Does she which once inspir'd thee, now renew, Bringing thee back those golden years which Time Smooth'd to thy lays, and polish'd with thy rhyme? Nor is't to thee alone she does convey Such happy change, but bountiful as day, On whatsoever reader she does shine, She makes him like thee, and for ever thine. And first thy manual op'ning gives to see Eclipse and suff'rings burnish majesty, Where thou so artfully the draught hast made That we best read the lustre in the shade, And find our sov'reign greater in that shroud: So lightning dazzles from its night and cloud, So the First Light Himself has for His throne Blackness, and darkness his pavilion. Who can refuse thee company, or stay, By thy next charming summons forc'd away, If that be force which we can so resent, That only in its joys 'tis violent: Upward thy Eagle bears us ere aware, Till above storms and all tempestuous air We radiant worlds with their bright people meet, Leaving this little all beneath our feet. But now the pleasure is too great to tell, Nor have we other bus'ness than to dwell, As on the hallow'd Mount th' Apostles meant To build and fix their glorious banishment. Yet we must know and find thy skilful vein Shall gently bear us to our homes again; By which descent thy former flight's impli'd To be thy ecstacy and not thy pride. And here how well does the wise Muse demean Herself, and fit her song to ev'ry scene! Riot of courts, the bloody wreaths of war, Cheats of the mart, and clamours of the bar, Nay, life itself thou dost so well express, Its hollow joys, and real emptiness, That Dorian minstrel never did excite, Or raise for dying so much appetite. Nor does thy other softer magic move Us less thy fam'd Etesia to love; Where such a character thou giv'st, that shame Nor envy dare approach the vestal dame: So at bright prime ideas none repine, They safely in th' eternal poet shine. Gladly th' Assyrian ph nix now resumes From thee this last reprisal of his plumes; He seems another more miraculous thing, Brighter of crest, and stronger of his wing, Proof against Fate in spicy urns to come, Immortal past all risk of martyrdom. Nor be concern'd, nor fancy thou art rude T' adventure from thy Cambrian solitude: Best from those lofty cliffs thy Muse does spring Upwards, and boldly spreads her cherub wing. So when the sage of Memphis would converse With boding skies, and th' azure universe, He climbs his starry pyramid, and thence Freely sucks clean prophetic influence, And all serene, and rapt and gay he pries Through the ethereal volume's mysteries, Loth to come down, or ever to know more The Nile's luxurious, but dull foggy shore. If sever'd friends by sympathy can join, And absent kings be honour'd in their coin; May they do both, who are so curb'd? but we Whom no such abstracts torture, that can see And pay each other a full self-return, May laugh, though all such metaphysics burn. 'Tis a kind soul in magnets, that atones Such two hard things as iron are and stones, Of love, than ever books could speak before. For though attraction hath got all the name, As if that power but from one side came, Which both unites; yet, where there is no sense There is no passion, nor intelligence: And so by consequence we cannot state A commerce, unless both we animate. For senseless things, though ne'er so called upon, Are deaf, and feel no invitation, But such as at the last day shall be shed By the great Lord of life into the dead. 'Tis then no heresy to end the strife With such rare doctrine as gives iron life. For were it otherwise which cannot be, And do thou judge my bold philosophy Then it would follow that if I were dead, Thy love, as now in life, would in that bed Of earth and darkness warm me, and dispense Effectual informing influence. Since then 'tis clear, that friendship is nought else But a joint, kind propension, and excess In none, but such whose equal, easy hearts Comply and meet both in their whole and parts, And when they cannot meet, do not forget To mingle souls, but secretly reflect And some third place their centre make, where they Silently mix, and make an unseen stay: Let me not say though poets may be bold Thou art more hard than steel, than stones more cold, But as the marigold in feasts of dew And early sunbeams, though but thin and few, Unfolds itself, then from the Earth's cold breast Heaves gently, and salutes the hopeful East: So from thy quiet cell, the retir'd throne Of thy fair thoughts, which silently bemoan Our sad distractions, come! and richly dress'd With reverend mirth and manners, check the rest Of loose, loath'd men! Why should I longer be Rack'd 'twixt two evils? I see and cannot see. A king and no king! Is he gone from us, And stoln alive into his coffin thus? This was to ravish death, and so prevent The rebels' treason and their punishment. He would not have them damn'd, and therefore he Himself deposd his own majesty. Wolves did pursue him, and to fly the ill He wanders royal saint! in sheepskin still. Poor, obscure shelter, if that shelter be Obscure, which harbours so much majesty. Hence, profane eyes! the mystery's so deep, Like Esdras books, the vulgar must not see't. Thou flying roll, written with tears and woe, Not for thy royal self, but for thy foe! Thy grief is prophecy, and doth portend, Like sad Ezekiel's sighs, the rebel's end. Thy robes forc'd off, like Samuel's when rent, Do figure out another's punishment. Nor grieve thou hast put off thyself awhile, To serve as prophet to this sinful isle; These are our days of Purim, which oppress The Church, and force thee to the wilderness. But all these clouds cannot thy light confine, The sun in storms and after them, will shine. Thy day of life cannot be yet complete, 'Tis early, sure, thy shadow is so great. But I am vex'd, that we at all can guess This change, and trust great Charles to such a dress. When he was first obscur'd with this coarse thing, He grac'd plebeians, but profan'd the king: Like some fair church, which zeal to charcoals burn'd, Or his own court now to an alehouse turn'd. But full as well may we blame night, and chide His wisdom, Who doth light with darkness hide, Or deny curtains to thy royal bed, As take this sacred cov'ring from thy head. Secrets of State are points we must not know; This vizard is thy privy-council now, Thou royal riddle, and in everything The true white prince, our hieroglyphic king! Ride safely in His shade, Who gives thee light, And can with blindness thy pursuers smite. O! may they wander all from thee as far As they from peace are, and thyself from war! And wheresoe'er thou dost design to be With thy now spotted spotless majesty, Be sure to look no sanctuary there, Nor hope for safety in a temple, where Buyers and sellers trade: O! strengthen not With too much trust the treason of a Scot! Tis madness sure; and I am in the fit, To dare an eagle with my unfledg'd wit. For what did ever Rome or Athens sing In all their lines, as lofty as his wing? He that an eagle's powers would rehearse Should with his plumes first feather all his verse. I know not, when into thee I would pry, Which to admire, thy wing first, or thine eye; Or whether Nature at thy birth design'd More of her fire for thee, or of her wind. When thou in the clear heights and upmost air Dost face the sun and his dispersd hair, Ev'n from that distance thou the sea dost spy And sporting in its deep, wide lap, the fry. Not the least minnow there but thou canst see: Whole seas are narrow spectacles to thee. Nor is this element of water here Below of all thy miracles the sphere. If poets ought may add unto thy store, Thou hast in heav'n of wonders many more. For when just Jove to earth his thunder bends, And from that bright, eternal fortress sends His louder volleys, straight this bird doth fly To tna, where his magazine doth lie, And in his active talons brings him more Of ammunition, and recruits his store. Nor is't a low or easy lift. He soars 'Bove wind and fire; gets to the moon, and pores With scorn upon her duller face; for she Gives him but shadows and obscurity. Here much displeas'd, that anything like night Should meet him in his proud and lofty flight, That such dull tinctures should advance so far, And rival in the glories of a star, Resolv'd he is a nobler course to try, And measures out his voyage with his eye. Then with such fury he begins his flight, As if his wings contended with his sight. Leaving the moon, whose humble light doth trade With spots, and deals most in the dark and shade, To the day's royal planet he doth pass With daring eyes, and makes the sun his glass. Here doth he plume and dress himself, the beams Rushing upon him like so many streams; While with direct looks he doth entertain The thronging flames, and shoots them back again. And thus from star to star he doth repair, And wantons in that pure and peaceful air. Sometimes he frights the starry swan, and now Orion's fearful hare, and then the crow. Then with the orb itself he moves, to see Which is more swift, th' intelligence or he. Thus with his wings his body he hath brought Where man can travel only in a thought. I will not seek, rare bird, what spirit 'tis That mounts thee thus; I'll be content with this, To think that Nature made thee to express Our soul's bold heights in a material dress. You have oblig'd the patriarch, and 'tis known He is your debtor now, though for his own. What he wrote is a medley: we can see Confusion trespass on his piety. Misfortunes did not only strike at him, They chargd further, and oppress'd his pen; For he wrote as his crosses came, and went By no safe rule, but by his punishment. His quill mov'd by the rod; his wits and he Did know no method, but their misery. You brought his Psalms now into tune. Nay all His measures thus are more than musical; Your method and his airs are justly sweet, And what's church music right like anthems meet. You did so much in this, that I believe He gave the matter, you the form did give. And yet I wish you were not understood, For now 'tis a misfortune to be good! Why then you'll say, all I would have, is this: None must be good, because the time's amiss. For since wise Nature did ordain the night, I would not have the sun to give us light. Whereas this doth not take the use away, But urgeth the necessity of day. Proceed to make your pious work as free, Stop not your seasonable charity. Good works despis'd or censur'd by bad times Should be sent out to aggravate their crimes. They should first share and then reject our store, Abuse our good, to make their guilt the more. 'Tis war strikes at our sins, but it must be A persecution wounds our piety. Now that the public sorrow doth subside, And those slight tears which custom springs are dried; While all the rich and outside mourners pass Home from thy dust, to empty their own glass; I who the throng affect not, nor their state Steal to thy grave undress'd, to meditate On our sad loss, accompanied by none, An obscure mourner that would weep alone. So, when the world's great luminary sets, Some scarce known star into the zenith gets, Twinkles and curls, a weak but willing spark, As glow-worms here do glitter in the dark. Yet, since the dimmest flame that kindles there An humble love unto the light doth bear, And true devotion from an hermit's cell Will Heav'n's kind King as soon reach and as well, As that which from rich shrines and altars flies, Led by ascending incense to the skies: 'Tis no malicious rudeness, if the might Of love makes dark things wait upon the bright, And from my sad retirements calls me forth, The just recorder of thy death and worth. Long didst thou live if length be measured by The tedious reign of our calamity And counter to all storms and changes still Kept'st the same temper, and the selfsame will. Though trials came as duly as the day, And in such mists, that none could see his way, Yet thee I found still virtuous, and saw The sun give clouds, and Charles give both the law. When private interest did all hearts bend, And wild dissents the public peace did rend, Thou, neither won, nor worn, wert still thyself, Not aw'd by force, nor basely brib'd with pelf. What the insuperable stream of times Did dash thee with, those suff'rings were, not crimes. So the bright sun eclipses bears; and we, Because then passive, blame him not. Should he For enforc'd shades, and the moon's ruder veil Much nearer us than him, be judg'd to fail? Who traduce thee, so err. As poisons by Correction are made antidotes, so thy Just soul did turn ev'n hurtful things to good, Us'd bad laws so they drew not tears, nor blood. Heav'n was thy aim, and thy great, rare design Was not to lord it here, but there to shine. Earth nothing had, could tempt thee. All that e'er Thou pray'd'st for here was peace, and glory there. For though thy course in Time's long progress fell On a sad age, when war and open'd hell Licens'd all arts and sects, and made it free To thrive by fraud, and blood, and blasphemy: Yet thou thy just inheritance didst by No sacrilege, nor pillage multiply. No rapine swell'd thy state, no bribes, nor fees, Our new oppressors' best annuities. Such clean pure hands hadst thou! and for thy heart, Man's secret region, and his noblest part; Since I was privy to't, and had the key Of that fair room, where thy bright spirit lay, I must affirm it did as much surpass Most I have known, as the clear sky doth glass. Constant and kind, and plain, and meek, and mild It was, and with no new conceits defil'd. Busy, but sacred thoughts like bees did still Within it stir, and strive unto that hill Where redeem'd spirits, evermore alive, After their work is done, ascend and hive. No outward tumults reach'd this inward place: 'Twas holy ground, where peace, and love, and grace Kept house, where the immortal restless life, In a most dutiful and pious strife, Like a fix'd watch, mov'd all in order still; The will serv'd God, and ev'ry sense the will! In this safe state Death met thee, Death, which is But a kind usher of the good to bliss, Therefore to weep because thy course is run, Or droop like flow'rs, which lately lost the sun, I cannot yield, since Faith will not permit A tenure got by conquest to the pit. For the great Victor fought for us, and He Counts ev'ry dust that is laid up of thee. Besides, Death now grows decrepit, and hath Spent the most part both of its time and wrath. That thick, black night, which mankind fear'd, is torn By troops of stars, and the bright day's forlorn. The next glad news most glad unto the just! Will be the trumpet's summons from the dust. Then I'll not grieve; nay, more, I'll not allow My soul should think thee absent from me now. Some bid their dead Good night! but I will say Good morrow to dear Charles! for it is day. It is perform'd! and thy great name doth run Through ev'ry sign, an everlasting sun, Not planet-like, but fixed; and we can see Thy genius stand still in his apogee. For how canst thou an aux eternal miss, Where ev'ry house thy exaltation is? Here's no ecliptic threatens thee with night, Although the wiser few take in thy light. They are not at that glorious pitch, to be In a conjunction with divinity. Could we partake some oblique ray of thine, Salute thee in a sextile, or a trine, It were enough; but thou art flown so high, The telescope is turn'd a common eye. Had the grave Chaldee liv'd thy book to see, He had known no astrology but thee; Nay, more for I believe't thou shouldst have been Tutor to all his planets, and to him. Thus, whosoever reads thee, his charm'd sense Proves captive to thy zodiac's influence. Were it not foul to err so, I should look Here for the Rabbins' universal book: And say, their fancies did but dream of thee, When first they doted on that mystery. Each line's a via lactea , where we may See thy fair steps, and tread that happy way Thy genius led thee in. Still I will be Lodg'd in some sign, some face, and some degree Of thy bright zodiac; thus I'll teach my sense To move by that, and thee th' intelligence. Saw not, Lysimachus, last day, when we Took the pure air in its simplicity, And our own too, how the trimm'd gallants went Cringing, and pass'd each step some compliment? What strange, fantastic diagrams they drew With legs and arms; the like we never knew In Euclid, Archimede, nor all of those Whose learnd lines are neither verse nor prose? What store of lace was there? how did the gold Run in rich traces, but withal made bold To measure the proud things, and so deride The fops with that, which was part of their pride? How did they point at us, and boldly call, As if we had been vassals to them all, Their poor men-mules, sent thither by hard fate To yoke ourselves for their sedans, and state? Of all ambitions, this was not the least, Whose drift translated man into a beast. What blind discourse the heroes did afford! This lady was their friend, and such a lord. How much of blood was in it! one could tell He came from Bevis and his Arundel; Morglay was yet with him, and he could do More feats with it than his old grandsire too. Wonders my friend at this? what is't to thee, Who canst produce a nobler pedigree, And in mere truth affirm thy soul of kin To some bright star, or to a cherubin? When these in their profuse moods spend the night, With the same sins they drive away the light. Thy learnd thrift puts her to use, while she Reveals her fiery volume unto thee; And looking on the separated skies, And their clear lamps, with careful thoughts and eyes, Thou break'st through Nature's upmost rooms and bars To heav'n, and there conversest with the stars. Well fare such harmless, happy nights, that be Obscur'd with nothing but their privacy, And missing but the false world's glories do Miss all those vices which attend them too! Fret not to hear their ill-got, ill-giv'n praise; Thy darkest nights outshine their brightest days. Boast not, proud Golgotha, that thou canst show The ruins of mankind, and let us know How frail a thing is flesh! though we see there But empty skulls, the Rabbins still live here. They are not dead, but full of blood again; I mean the sense, and ev'ry line a vein. Triumph not o'er their dust; whoever looks In here, shall find their brains all in their books. Nor is't old Palestine alone survives; Athens lives here, more than in Plutarch's Lives. The stones, which sometimes danc'd unto the strain Of Orpheus, here do lodge his Muse again. And you, the Roman spirits, learning has Made your lives longer than your empire was. Csar had perish'd from the world of men Had not his sword been rescu'd by his pen. Rare Seneca, how lasting is thy breath! Though Nero did, thou couldst not bleed to death. How dull the expert tyrant was, to look For that in thee which livd in thy book! Afflictions turn our blood to ink, and we Commence, when writing, our eternity. Lucilius here I can behold, and see His counsels and his life proceed from thee. But what care I to whom thy Letters be? I change the name, and thou dost write to me; And in this age, as sad almost as thine, Thy stately Consolations are mine. Poor earth! what though thy viler dust enrolls The frail enclosures of these mighty souls? Their graves are all upon record; not one But is as bright and open as the sun. And though some part of them obscurely fell, And perish'd in an unknown, private cell, Yet in their books they found a glorious way To live unto the Resurrection-day! Most noble Bodley! we are bound to thee For no small part of our eternity. Thy treasure was not spent on horse and hound, Nor that new mode which doth old states confound. Thy legacies another way did go: Nor were they left to those would spend them so. Thy safe, discreet expense on us did flow; Walsam is in the midst of Oxford now. Th' hast made us all thine heirs; whatever we Hereafter write, 'tis thy posterity. This is thy monument! here thou shalt stand Till the times fail in their last grain of sand. And wheresoe'er thy silent relics keep, This tomb will never let thine honour sleep, Still we shall think upon thee; all our fame Meets here to speak one letter of thy name. Thou canst not die! here thou art more than safe, Where every book is thy large epitaph. For shame desist, why shouldst thou seek my fall? It cannot make thee more monarchical. Leave off; thy empire is already built; To ruin me were to enlarge thy guilt, Not thy prerogative. I am not he Must be the measure to thy victory. The Fates hatch more for thee; 'twere a disgrace If in thy annals I should make a clause. The future ages will disclose such men Shall be the glory, and the end of them. Nor do I flatter. So long as there be Descents in Nature, or posterity, There must be fortunes; whether they be good, As swimming in thy tide and plenteous flood, Or stuck fast in the shallow ebb, when we Miss to deserve thy gorgeous charity. Thus, Fortune, the great world thy period is; Nature and you are parallels in this. But thou wilt urge me still. Away, be gone, I am resolv'd, I will not be undone. I scorn thy trash, and thee: nay, more, I do Despise myself, because thy subject too. Name me heir to thy malice, and I'll be; Thy hate's the best inheritance for me. I care not for your wondrous hat and purse, Make me a Fortunatus with thy curse. How careful of myself then should I be, Were I neglected by the world and thee? Why dost thou tempt me with thy dirty ore, And with thy riches make my soul so poor? My fancy's pris'ner to thy gold and thee, Thy favours rob me of my liberty. I'll to my speculations. Is't best To be confin'd to some dark, narrow chest And idolize thy stamps, when I may be Lord of all Nature, and not slave to thee? The world's my palace. I'll contemplate there, And make my progress into ev'ry sphere. The chambers of the air are mine; those three Well-furnish'd stories my possession be. I hold them all in capite , and stand Propp'd by my fancy there. I scorn your land, It lies so far below me. Here I see How all the sacred stars do circle me. Thou to the great giv'st rich food, and I do Want no content; I feed on manna too. They have their tapers; I gaze without fear On flying lamps and flaming comets here. Their wanton flesh in silks and purple shrouds, And fancy wraps me in a robe of clouds. There some delicious beauty they may woo, And I have Nature for my mistress too. But these are mean; the archetype I can see, And humbly touch the hem of majesty. The power of my soul is such, I can Expire, and so analyze all that's man. First my dull clay I give unto the Earth, Our common mother, which gives all their birth. My growing faculties I send as soon, Whence first I took them, to the humid moon. All subtleties and every cunning art To witty Mercury I do impart. Those fond affections which made me a slave To handsome faces, Venus, thou shalt have. And saucy pride if there was aught in me Sol, I return it to thy royalty. My daring rashness and presumptions be To Mars himself an equal legacy. My ill-plac'd avarice sure 'tis but small Jove, to thy flames I do bequeath it all. And my false magic, which I did believe, And mystic lies, to Saturn I do give. My dark imaginations rest you there, This is your grave and superstitious sphere. Get up, my disentangled soul, thy fire Is now refin'd, and nothing left to tire Or clog thy wings. Now my auspicious flight Hath brought me to the empyrean light. I am a sep'rate essence, and can see The emanations of the Deity, And how they pass the seraphims, and run Through ev'ry throne and domination. So rushing through the guard the sacred streams Flow to the neighbour stars, and in their beams A glorious cataract! descend to earth, And give impressions unto ev'ry birth. With angels now and spirits I do dwell, And here it is my nature to do well. Thus, though my body you confind see, My boundless thoughts have their ubiquity. And shall I then forsake the stars and signs, To dote upon thy dark and cursd mines? Unhappy, sad exchange! what, must I buy Guiana with the loss of all the sky? Intelligences shall I leave, and be Familiar only with mortality? Must I know nought, but thy exchequer? shall My purse and fancy be symmetrical? Are there no objects left but one? must we In gaining that, lose our variety? Fortune, this is the reason I refuse Thy wealth; it puts my books all out of use. 'Tis poverty that makes me wise; my mind Is big with speculation, when I find My purse as Randolph's was, and I confess There is no blessing to an emptiness! The species of all things to me resort And dwell then in my breast, as in their port. Then leave to court me with thy hated store; Thou giv'st me that, to rob my soul of more. So from our cold, rude world, which all things tires, To his warm Indies the bright sun retires. Where, in those provinces of gold and spice, Perfumes his progress, pleasures fill his eyes, Which, so refresh'd, in their return convey Fire into rubies, into crystals, day; And prove, that light in kinder climates can Work more on senseless stones, than here on man. But you, like one ordain'd to shine, take in Both light and heat, can love and wisdom spin Into one thread, and with that firmly tie The same bright blessings on posterity: Shall, with your name, descend still to your own. When I am dead, and malice or neglect The worst they can upon my dust reflect; For poets yet have left no names, but such As men have envied or despis'd too much You above both and what state more excels, Since a just fame like health, nor wants, nor swells? To after ages shall remain entire, And shine still spotless, like your planet's fire. No single lustre neither; the access Of your fair love will yours adorn and bless; Till, from that bright conjunction, men may view A constellation circling her and you. So two sweet rose-buds from their virgin-beds First peep and blush, then kiss and couple heads, Till yearly blessings so increase their store, Those two can number two-and-twenty more, And the fair bank by Heav'n's free bounty crown'd With choice of sweets and beauties doth abound, Till Time, which families, like flowers, far spreads, Gives them for garlands to the best of heads. Then late posterity if chance, or some Shall tell them who the poet was, and how He liv'd and lov'd thee too, which thou dost know Straight to my grave will flowers and spices bring, With lights and hymns, and for an offering There vow this truth, that love which in old times Was censur'd blind, and will contract worse crimes If hearts mend not did for thy sake in me Find both his eyes, and all foretell and see. Now I have seen her; and by Cupid The young Medusa made me stupid! A face, that hath no lovers slain, Wants forces, and is near disdain. For every fop will freely peep At majesty that is asleep. But she fair tyrant! hates to be Gaz'd on with such impunity. Whose prudent rigour bravely bears And scorns the trick of whining tears, Or sighs, those false alarms of grief, Which kill not, but afford relief. Nor is it thy hard fate to be Alone in this calamity, Since I who came but to be gone, Am plagu'd for merely looking on. Mark from her forehead to her foot What charming sweets are there to do't. A head adorn'd with all those glories That wit hath shadow'd in quaint stories, Or pencil with rich colours drew In imitation of the true. Her hair, laid out in curious sets And twists, doth show like silken nets, Where since he play'd at hit or miss The god of Love her pris'ner is, And fluttering with his skittish wings Puts all her locks in curls and rings. Like twinkling stars her eyes invite All gazers to so sweet a light, But then two archd clouds of brown Stand o'er, and guard them with a frown. Beneath these rays of her bright eyes, Beauty's rich bed of blushes lies. Blushes which lightning-like come on, Yet stay not to be gaz'd upon; But leave the lilies of her skin As fair as ever, and run in, Like swift salutes which dull paint scorn 'Twixt a white noon and crimson morn. What coral can her lips resemble? For hers are warm, swell, melt, and tremble: And if you dare contend for red, This is alive, the other dead. Her equal teeth above, below All of a size and smoothness grow. Where under close restraint and awe Which is the maiden tyrant law Like a cag'd, sullen linnet, dwells Her tongue, the key to potent spells. Her skin, like heav'n when calm and bright, Shows a rich azure under white, With touch more soft than heart supposes, And breath as sweet as new-blown roses. Betwixt this headland and the main, Which is a rich and flow'ry plain, Lies her fair neck, so fine and slender, That gently how you please 'twill bend her. This leads you to her heart, which ta'en, Pants under sheets of whitest lawn, And at the first seems much distress'd, But, nobly treated, lies at rest. Here, like two balls of new fall'n snow, Her breasts, Love's native pillows, grow; And out of each a rose-bud peeps, Which infant Beauty sucking sleeps. Say now, my Stoic, that mak'st sour faces At all the beauties and the graces, That criest, unclean! though known thyself To ev'ry coarse and dirty shelf: Couldst thou but see a piece like this, A piece so full of sweets and bliss, In shape so rare, in soul so rich, Wouldst thou not swear she is a witch? Fool that I was! to believe blood, While swoll'n with greatness, then most good; And the false thing, forgetful man, To trust more than our true god, Pan. Such swellings to a dropsy tend, And meanest things such great ones bend. Then live deceived! and, Fida, by That life destroy fidelity. For living wrongs will make some wise, While Death chokes loudest injuries: And screens the faulty, making blinds To hide the most unworthy minds. And yet do what thou can'st to hide, A bad tree's fruit will be describ'd. For that foul guilt which first took place In his dark heart, now damns his face; And makes those eyes, where life should dwell, Look like the pits of Death and Hell. Blood, whose rich purple shows and seals Their faith in Moors, in him reveals A blackness at the heart, and is Turn'd ink to write his faithlessness. Only his lips with blood look red, As if asham'd of what they fed. Then, since he wears in a dark skin The shadows of his hell within, Expose him no more to the light, But thine own epitaph thus write Here burst, and dead and unregarded Lies Fida's heart! O well rewarded! Long since great wits have left the stage Unto the drollers of the age, And noble numbers with good sense Are, like good works, grown an offence. While much of verse worse than old story Such trash-admirers made us poor, And pies turn'd poets out of door; For the nice spirit of rich verse Which scorns absurd and low commerce, Although a flame from heav'n, if shed On rooks or daws warms no such head. Or else the poet, like bad priest, Is seldom good, but when oppress'd; And wit as well as piety Doth thrive best in adversity For since the thunder left our air Their laurels look not half so fair. However 'tis, 'twere worse than rude, Not to profess our gratitude And debts to thee, who at so low An ebb dost make us thus to flow; And when we did a famine fear, Hast bless'd us with a fruitful year. So while the world his absence mourns, The glorious sun at last returns, And with his kind and vital looks Warms the cold earth and frozen brooks, Puts drowsy Nature into play, And rids impediments away, Till flow'rs and fruits and spices through Her pregnant lap get up and grow. But if among those sweet things, we A miracle like that could see Which Nature brought but once to pass, A Muse, such as Orinda was, Ph bus himself won by these charms Would give her up into thy arms; And recondemn'd to kiss his tree, Yield the young goddess unto thee. Learning and Law, your day is done, And your work too; you may be gone Trever, that lov'd you, hence is fled: And Right, which long lay sick, is dead. Trever! whose rare and envied part Was both a wise and winning heart, Whose sweet civilities could move Tartars and Goths to noblest love. Bold vice and blindness now dare act, And like the grey groat pass, though crack'd; Whose words are well-weigh'd and tried gold. O, how much to discreet desires Differs pure light from foolish fires! But nasty dregs outlast the wine, And after sunset glow-worms shine. What smiling star in that fair night Which gave you birth gave me this sight, And with a kind aspect tho' keen Made me the subject, you the queen? That sparkling planet is got now Into your eyes, and shines below, Where nearer force and more acute It doth dispense, without dispute; For I who yesterday did know Love's fire no more than doth cool snow, With one bright look am since undone, Yet must adore and seek my sun. Before I walk'd free as the wind And if but stay'd like it unkind; I could like daring eagles gaze And not be blinded by a face; For what I saw till I saw thee, Was only not deformity. Such shapes appear compar'd with thine In arras, or a tavern-sign, And do but mind me to explore A fairer piece, that is in store. So some hang ivy to their wine, To signify there is a vine. Those princely flow'rs by no storms vex'd Which smile one day, and droop the next, The gallant tulip and the rose, Emblems which some use to disclose Bodied ideas their weak grace Is mere imposture to thy face. For Nature in all things, but thee, Did practise only sophistry; Or else she made them to express How she could vary in her dress: But thou wert form'd, that we might see Perfection, not variety. Have you observ'd how the day-star Sparkles and smiles and shines from far; Then to the gazer doth convey A silent but a piercing ray? So wounds my love, but that her eyes Are in effects the better skies. A brisk bright agent from them streams Arm'd with no arrows, but their beams, And with such stillness smites our hearts, No noise betrays him, nor his darts. He, working on my easy soul, Did soon persuade, and then control; And now he flies and I conspire Through all my blood with wings of fire, And when I would which will be never With cold despair allay the fever, The spiteful thing Etesia names, And that new-fuels all my flames. Go catch the ph nix, and then bring A quill drawn for me from his wing. Give me a maiden beauty's blood, A pure, rich crimson, without mud, In whose sweet blushes that may live, Which a dull verse can never give. Now for an untouch'd, spotless white, For blackest things on paper write, Etesia, at thine own expense Give me the robes of innocence. Could we but see a spring to run Pure milk, as sometimes springs have done, And in the snow-white streams it sheds, Carnations wash their bloody heads, While ev'ry eddy that came down Did as thou dost both smile and frown. Such objects, and so fresh would be But dull resemblances of thee. Thou art the dark world's morning-star, Seen only, and seen but from far; Where, like astronomers, we gaze Upon the glories of thy face, But no acquaintance more can have, Though all our lives we watch and crave. Thou art a world thyself alone, Yea, three great worlds refin'd to one; Which shows all those, and in thine eyes The shining East and Paradise. Thy soul a spark of the first fire Is like the sun, the world's desire; And with a nobler influence Works upon all, that claim to sense; But in summers hath no fever, And in frosts is cheerful ever. As flow'rs besides their curious dress Rich odours have, and sweetnesses, Which tacitly infuse desire, And ev'n oblige us to admire: Such, and so full of innocence Are all the charms, thou dost dispense; And like fair Nature without arts At once they seize, and please our hearts. O, thou art such, that I could be A lover to idolatry! I could, and should from heav'n stray, But that thy life shows mine the way, And leave a while the Deity To serve His image here in thee. See you that beauteous queen, which no age tames? Her train is azure, set with golden flames: My brighter fair, fix on the East your eyes, And view that bed of clouds, whence she doth rise. Above all others in that one short hour Which most concern'd me, she had greatest pow'r. This made my fortunes humorous as wind, But fix'd affections to my constant mind. She fed me with the tears of stars, and thence I suck'd in sorrows with their influence. To some in smiles, and store of light she broke, To me in sad eclipses still she spoke. She bent me with the motion of her sphere, And made me feel what first I did but fear. But when I came to age, and had o'ergrown Her rules, and saw my freedom was my own, I did reply unto the laws of Fate, And made my reason my great advocate: I labour'd to inherit my just right; But then O, hear Etesia! lest I might Redeem myself, my unkind starry mother Took my poor heart, and gave it to another. O, subtle Love! thy peace is war, It wounds and kills without a scar, It works unknown to any sense, Like the decrees of Providence, And with strange silence shoots me through, The fire of Love doth fell like snow. Hath she no quiver, but my heart? Must all her arrows hit that part? Beauties like heav'n their gifts should deal Not to destroy us, but to heal. Strange art of Love! that can make sound, And yet exasperates the wound: That look she lent to ease my heart, Hath pierc'd it, and improv'd the smart. Go, if you must! but stay and know And mind before you go, my vow. To ev'ry thing, but heav'n and you, With all my heart I bid adieu! Now to those happy shades I'll go Where first I saw my beauteous foe! I'll seek each silent path where we Did walk; and where you sat with me I'll sit again, and never rest Till I can find some flow'r you press'd. That near my dying heart I'll keep, And when it wants dew I will weep: Sadly I will repeat past joys And words, which you did sometimes voice I'll listen to the woods, and hear The echo answer for you there. But famish'd with long absence I, Like infants left, at last shall cry, And tears as they do milk will sup Until you come, and take me up. Love, the world's life! what a sad death Thy absence is! to lose our breath At once and die, is but to live Enlarg'd, without the scant reprieve Of pulse and air; whose dull returns And narrow circles the soul mourns. But to be dead alive, and still To wish, but never have our will, To be possess'd, and yet to miss, To wed a true but absent bliss, Are ling'ring tortures, and their smart Dissects and racks and grinds the heart! As soul and body in that state Which unto us, seems separate, Cannot be said to live, until Reunion; which days fulfil And slow-pac'd seasons; so in vain Through hours and minutes Time's long train I look for thee, and from thy sight, As from my soul, for life and light. For till thine eyes shine so on me, Mine are fast-clos'd and will not see. Happy is he, that with fix'd eyes The fountain of all goodness spies! Happy is he that can break through Those bonds which tie him here below! The Thracian poet long ago, Kind Orpheus, full of tears and woe, Did for his lov'd Eurydice In such sad numbers mourn, that he Made the trees run in to his moan, And streams stand still to hear him groan. The does came fearless in one throng With lions to his mournful song, And charmed by the harmonious sound, The hare stay'd by the quiet hound. But when Love height'n'd by despair And deep reflections on his fair Had swell'd his heart, and made it rise And run in tears out at his eyes, And those sweet airs, which did appease Wild beasts, could give their lord no ease; Then, vex'd that so much grief and love Mov'd not at all the gods above, With desperate thoughts and bold intent, Towards the shades below he went; For thither his fair love was fled, And he must have her from the dead. There in such lines, as did well suit With sad airs and a lover's lute, And in the richest language dress'd That could be thought on or express'd, Did he complain; whatever grief Or art or love which is the chief, And all ennobles could lay out, In well-tun'd woes he dealt about. And humbly bowing to the prince Of ghosts begg'd some intelligence Of his Eurydice, and where His beauteous saint resided there. Then to his lute's instructed groans He sigh'd out new melodious moans; And in a melting, charming strain Begg'd his dear love to life again. The music flowing through the shade And darkness did with ease invade The silent and attentive ghosts; And Cerberus, which guards those coasts With his loud barkings, overcome The Furies, us'd to rave and howl And prosecute each guilty soul, Had lost their rage, and in a deep Transport, did most profusely weep. Ixion's wheel stopp'd, and the curs'd Tantalus, almost kill'd with thirst, Though the streams now did make no haste, But wait'd for him, none would taste. That vulture, which fed still upon Tityus his liver, now was gone To feed on air, and would not stay, Though almost famish'd, with her prey. Won with these wonders, their fierce prince At last cried out, We yield! and since Thy merits claim no less, take hence Thy consort for thy recompense: But Orpheus, to this law we bind Our grant: you must not look behind, Nor of your fair love have one sight, Till out of our dominions quite. Alas! what laws can lovers awe? Love is itself the greatest law! Or who can such hard bondage brook To be in love, and not to look? Poor Orpheus almost in the light Lost his dear love for one short sight; And by those eyes, which Love did guide, What he most lov'd unkindly died! This tale of Orpheus and his love Was meant for you, who ever move Upwards, and tend into that light, Which is not seen by mortal sight. For if, while you strive to ascend, You droop, and towards Earth once bend Your seduc'd eyes, down you will fall Ev'n while you look, and forfeit all. What fix'd affections, and lov'd laws Which are the hid, magnetic cause Wise Nature governs with, and by What fast, inviolable tie The whole creation to her ends For ever provident she bends: All this I purpose to rehearse In the sweet airs of solemn verse. Although the Libyan lions should Be bound in chains of purest gold, And duly fed were taught to know Their keeper's voice, and fear his blow: Yet, if they chance to taste of blood, Their rage which slept, stirr'd by that food In furious roaring will awake, And fiercely for their freedom make. No chains nor bars their fury brooks, But with enrag'd and bloody looks They will break through, and dull'd with fear Their keeper all to pieces tear. The bird, which on the wood's tall boughs Sings sweetly, if you cage or house, And out of kindest care should think To give her honey with her drink, And get her store of pleasant meat, Ev'n such as she delights to eat: Yet, if from her close prison she The shady groves doth chance to see, Straightway she loathes her pleasant food, And with sad looks longs for the wood. The wood, the wood alone she loves! And towards it she looks and moves: And in sweet notes though distant from Sings to her first and happy home! That plant, which of itself doth grow Upwards, if forc'd, will downwards bow; But give it freedom, and it will Get up, and grow erectly still. The sun, which by his prone descent Seems westward in the evening bent, Doth nightly by an unseen way Haste to the East, and bring up day. Thus all things long for their first state, And gladly to't return, though late. Nor is there here to anything A course allow'd, but in a ring: Which, where it first began, must end, And to that point directly tend. Who would unclouded see the laws Of the supreme, eternal Cause, Let him with careful thoughts and eyes Observe the high and spacious skies. There in one league of love the stars Keep their old peace, and show our wars. The sun, though flaming still and hot, The cold, pale moon annoyeth not. Arcturus with his sons though they See other stars go a far way, And out of sight yet still are found Near the North Pole, their noted bound. Bright Hesper at set times delights To usher in the dusky nights: And in the East again attends To warn us, when the day ascends. So alternate Love supplies Eternal courses still, and vies Mutual kindness; that no jars Nor discord can disturb the stars. The same sweet concord here below Makes the fierce elements to flow And circle without quarrel still, Though temper'd diversely; thus will The hot assist the cold; the dry Is a friend to humidity: And by the law of kindness they The like relief to them repay. The fire, which active is and bright, Tends upward, and from thence gives light. The earth allows it all that space And makes choice of the lower place; For things of weight haste to the centre, A fall to them is no adventure. From these kind turns and circulation Seasons proceed, and generation. This makes the Spring to yield us flow'rs, And melts the clouds to gentle show'rs. The Summer thus matures all seeds And ripens both the corn and weeds. This brings on Autumn, which recruits Our old, spent store, with new fresh fruits. And the cold Winter's blust'ring season Hath snow and storms for the same reason. This temper and wise mixture breed And bring forth ev'ry living seed. And when their strength and substance spend For while they live, they drive and tend Still to a change it takes them hence And shifts their dress! and to our sense Their course is over, as their birth: And hid from us they turn to earth. But all this while the Prince of life Sits without loss, or change, or strife: Holding the reins, by which all move And those His wisdom, power, love And justice are and still what He The first life bids, that needs must be, And live on for a time; that done He calls it back, merely to shun The mischief, which His creature might Run into by a further flight. For if this dear and tender sense Of His preventing providence, Did not restrain and call things back, Both heav'n and earth would go to rack, And from their great Preserver part; As blood let out forsakes the heart And perisheth, but what returns With fresh and brighter spirits burns. This is the cause why ev'ry living Creature affects an endless being. A grain of this bright love each thing Had giv'n at first by their great King; And still they creep drawn on by this And look back towards their first bliss. For, otherwise, it is most sure, Nothing that liveth could endure: Unless its love turn'd retrograde Sought that First Life, which all things made. If old tradition hath not fail'd, Ulysses, when from Troy he sail'd Was by a tempest forc'd to land Where beauteous Circe did command. Circe, the daughter of the sun, Which had with charms and herbs undone Many poor strangers, and could then Turn into beasts the bravest men. Such magic in her potions lay, That whosoever passed that way And drank, his shape was quickly lost. Some into swine she turn'd, but most To lions arm'd with teeth and claws; Others like wolves with open jaws Did howl; but some more savage took The tiger's dreadful shape and look. But wise Ulysses, by the aid Of Hermes, had to him convey'd A flow'r, whose virtue did suppress The force of charms, and their success: While his mates drank so deep, that they Were turn'd to swine, which fed all day On mast, and human food had left, Of shape and voice at once bereft; Only the mind above all charms Unchang'd did mourn those monstrous harms. O, worthless herbs, and weaker arts, To change their limbs, but not their hearts! Man's life and vigour keep within, Lodg'd in the centre, not the skin. Those piercing charms and poisons, which His inward parts taint and bewitch, More fatal are, than such, which can Outwardly only spoil the man. Those change his shape and make it foul, But these deform and kill his soul. All sorts of men, that live on Earth, Have one beginning and one birth. For all things there is one Father, Who lays out all, and all doth gather. He the warm sun with rays adorns, And fills with brightness the moon's horns. The azur'd heav'ns with stars He burnish'd, And the round world with creatures furnish'd. But men made to inherit all His own sons He was pleas'd to call, And that they might be so indeed, He gave them souls of divine seed. A noble offspring surely then Without distinction are all men. O, why so vainly do some boast Their birth and blood and a great host Of ancestors, whose coats and crests Are some rav'nous birds or beasts! If extraction they look for, And God, the great Progenitor, No man, though of the meanest state, Is base, or can degenerate, Unless, to vice and lewdness bent, He leaves and taints his true descent. Most happy man! who in his own sweet fields Spent all his time; to whom one cottage yields In age and youth a lodging; who, grown old, Walks with his staff on the same soil and mould Where he did creep an infant, and can tell Many fair years spent in one quiet cell! No toils of fate made him from home far known, Nor foreign waters drank, driv'n from his own. No loss by sea, no wild land's wasteful war Vex'd him, not the brib'd coil of gowns at bar. Exempt from cares, in cities never seen, The fresh field-air he loves, and rural green. The year's set turns by fruits, not consuls, knows; Autumn by apples, May by blossom'd boughs. Within one hedge his sun doth set and rise, The world's wide day his short demesnes comprise; Where he observes some known, concrescent twig Now grown an oak, and old, like him, and big. Verona he doth for the Indies take, And as the Red Sea counts Benacus' Lake. Yet are his limbs and strength untir'd, and he, A lusty grandsire, three descents doth see. Travel and sail who will, search sea or shore; This man hath liv'd, and that hath wander'd more. When Jove a heav'n of small glass did behold, He smil'd, and to the gods these words he told. Comes then the power of man's art to this? In a frail orb my work new acted is, The poles' decrees, the fate of things, God's laws, Down by his art old Archimedes draws. Spirits inclos'd the sev'ral stars attend, And orderly the living work they bend. A feignd Zodiac measures out the year, Ev'ry new month a false moon doth appear. And now bold industry is proud, it can Wheel round its world, and rule the stars by man. Why at Salmoneus' thunder do I stand? Nature is rivall'd by a single hand. A grove there grows, round with the sea confin'd, Beyond the Indies and the Eastern wind, Which, as the sun breaks forth in his first beam, Salutes his steeds, and hears him whip his team; When with his dewy coach the Eastern bay Crackles, whence blusheth the approaching Day, And blasted with his burnish'd wheels the Night In a pale dress doth vanish from the light. This the bless'd Ph nix' empire is, here he, Alone exempted from mortality, Enjoys a land, where no diseases reign, And ne'er afflicted like our world with pain. A bird most equal to the gods, which vies For length of life and durance with the skies, And with renew'd limbs tires ev'ry age His appetite he never doth assuage With common food. Nor doth he use to drink When thirsty on some river's muddy brink. A purer, vital heat shot from the sun Doth nourish him, and airy sweets that come From Tethys lap he tasteth at his need; On such abstracted diet doth he feed. A secret light there streams from both his eyes, A fiery hue about his cheeks doth rise. His crest grows up into a glorious star Giv'n t' adorn his head, and shines so far, That piercing through the bosom of the night It rends the darkness with a gladsome light. His thighs like Tyrian scarlet, and his wings More swift than winds are have sky-colour'd rings Flow'ry and rich: and round about enroll'd Their utmost borders glister all with gold. He's not conceiv'd, nor springs he from the Earth, But is himself the parent, and the birth. None him begets; his fruitful death reprieves Old age, and by his funerals he lives. For when the tedious Summer's gone about A thousand times: so many Winters out, So many Springs: and May doth still restore Those leaves, which Autumn had blown off before; Then press'd with years his vigour doth decline, Foil'd with the number; as a stately pine Tir'd out with storms bends from the top and height Of Caucasus, and falls with its own weight, Whose part is torn with daily blasts, with rain Part is consum'd, and part with age again; So now his eyes grown dusky, fail to see Far off, and drops of colder rheums there be Fall'n slow and dreggy from them; such in sight The cloudy moon is, having spent her light. And now his wings, which usd to contend With tempests, scarce from the low earth ascend. He knows his time is out! and doth provide New principles of life; herbs he brings dried From the hot hills, and with rich spices frames A pile, shall burn, and hatch him with its flames. On this the weakling sits; salutes the sun With pleasant noise, and prays and begs for some Of his own fire, that quickly may restore The youth and vigour, which he had before. Whom, soon as Ph bus spies, stopping his reins, He makes a stand and thus allays his pains. O thou that buriest old age in thy grave, And art by seeming funerals to have A new return of life, whose custom 'tis To rise by ruin, and by death to miss Ev'n death itself, a new beginning take, And that thy wither'd body now forsake! Better thyself by this thy change! This said He shakes his locks, and from his golden head Shoots one bright beam, which smites with vital fire The willing bird; to burn is his desire, That he may live again: he's proud in death, And goes in haste to gain a better breath. The spicy heap fir'd with celestial rays Doth burn the aged Ph nix, when straight stays The chariot of th' amazd moon; the pole Resists the wheeling swift orbs, and the whole Fabric of Nature at a stand remains, Till the old bird a new young being gains. All stop and charge the faithful flames, that they Suffer not Nature's glory to decay. By this time, life which in the ashes lurks Hath fram'd the heart, and taught new blood new works; The whole heap stirs, and ev'ry part assumes Due vigour; th' embers too are turn'd to plumes; The parent in the issue now revives, But young and brisk; the bounds of both these lives, With very little space between the same, Were parted only by the middle flame. To Nilus straight he goes to consecrate His parent's ghost; his mind is to translate Into a distant land, and doth convey The ashes in a turf. Birds do attend His journey without number, and defend His pious flight, like to a guard; the sky Is clouded with the army, as they fly. Nor is there one of all those thousands dares Affront his leader: they with solemn cares Attend the progress of their youthful king; Not the rude hawk, nor th' eagle that doth bring Arms up to Jove, fight now, lest they displease; The miracle enacts a common peace. So doth the Parthian lead from Tigris' side His barbarous troops, full of a lavish pride In pearls and habit; he adorns his head With royal tires: his steed with gold is led; His robes, for which the scarlet fish is sought, With rare Assyrian needle-work are wrought; And proudly reigning o'er his rascal bands, He raves and triumphs in his large commands. For rites, adores the sun; his temple stands There on a hundred pillars by account, Digg'd from the quarries of the Theban mount. Here, as the custom did require they say His happy parent's dust down he doth lay; Then to the image of his lord he bends And to the flames his burden straight commends. Unto the altars thus he destinates His own remains; the light doth gild the gates; Perfumes divine the censers up do send: While th' Indian odour doth itself extend To the Pelusian fens, and filleth all The men it meets with the sweet storm. A gale, To which compar'd nectar itself is vile, Fills the sev'n channels of the misty Nile. O happy bird! sole heir to thy own dust! Death, to whose force all other creatures must Submit, saves thee. Thy ashes make thee rise; 'Tis not thy nature, but thy age that dies. Thou hast seen all! and to the times that run Thou art as great a witness as the sun. Thou saw'st the deluge, when the sea outvied The land, and drown'd the mountains with the tide. What year the straggling Phton did fire The world, thou know'st. And no plagues can conspire Against thy life; alone thou dost arise Above mortality; the destinies Spin not thy days out with their fatal clue; They have no law, to which thy life is due. Bright books! the perspectives to our weak sights, The clear projections of discerning lights, Burning and shining thoughts, man's posthume day, The track of fled souls, and their Milky Way, The dead alive and busy, the still voice Of enlarg'd spirits, kind Heav'n's white decoys! Who lives with you, lives like those knowing flow'rs, Which in commerce with light spend all their hours: Which shut to clouds, and shadows nicely shun, But with glad haste unveil to kiss the sun. Beneath you, all is dark, and a dead night, Which whoso lives in, wants both health and sight. By sucking you, the wise like bees do grow Healing and rich, though this they do most slow, Because most choicely; for as great a store Have we of books, as bees of herbs, or more: And the great task, to try, then know, the good. To discern weeds, and judge of wholesome food, Is a rare, scant performance: for man dies Oft ere 'tis done, while the bee feeds and flies. But you were all choice flow'rs, all set and drest By old sage florists, who well knew the best: And I amidst you all am turned a weed! Not wanting knowledge, but for want of heed. Then thank thyself, wild fool, that wouldst not be Content to know what was too much for thee! Fair shining mountains of my pilgrimage And flowery vales, whose flow'rs were stars, The days and nights of my first happy age; An age without distaste and wars! When I by thoughts ascend your sunny heads, And mind those sacred midnight lights By which I walk'd, when curtain'd rooms and beds Confin'd or seal'd up others' sights: O then, how bright, And quick a light Doth brush my heart and scatter night; Chasing that shade, Which my sins made, While I so spring, as if I could not fade! How brave a prospect is a bright back-side! Where flow'rs and palms refresh the eye! And days well spent like the glad East abide, Whose morning-glories cannot die! Waters above! eternal springs! The dew that silvers the Dove's wings! O welcome, welcome to the sad! Give dry dust drink; drink that makes glad! Many fair ev'nings, many flow'rs Sweeten'd with rich and gentle showers, Have I enjoy'd, and down have run Many a fine and shining sun; But never, till this happy hour, Was blest with such an evening-shower! Fair Prince of Light! Light's living Well Who hast the keys of death and Hell! If the mole man despise Thy day, Put chains of darkness in his way. Teach him how deep, how various are The counsels of Thy love and care. When acts of grace and a long peace, Breed but rebellion, and displease, Then give him his own way and will, Where lawless he may run, until His own choice hurts him, and the sting Of his foul sins full sorrows bring. If Heaven and angels, hopes and mirth, Please not the mole so much as earth: Give him his mine to dig, or dwell, And one sad scheme of hideous Hell. Whither, O whither didst thou fly When I did grieve Thine holy eye? When Thou didst mourn to see me lost, And all Thy care and counsels cross'd. O do not grieve, where'er Thou art! Thy grief is an undoing smart, Which doth not only pain, but break My heart, and makes me blush to speak. Thy anger I could kiss, and will; But O Thy grief, Thy grief, doth kill. O come, and welcome! come, refine! For Moors, if wash'd by Thee, will shine. Man blossoms at Thy touch; and he, When Thou draw'st blood is Thy rose-tree. Crosses make straight his crookd ways, And clouds but cool his dog-star days; Diseases too, when by Thee blest, Are both restoratives and rest. Flow'rs that in sunshines riot still, Die scorch'd and sapless; though storms kill, The fall is fair, e'en to desire, Where in their sweetness all expire. O come, pour on! what calms can be So fair as storms, that appease Thee? Fresh fields and woods! the Earth's fair face! God's footstool! and man's dwelling-place! I ask not why the first believer Did love to be a country liver? Who, to secure pious content, Did pitch by groves and wells his tent; Where he might view the boundless sky, And all those glorious lights on high, With flying meteors, mists, and show'rs, Subjected hills, trees, meads, and flow'rs, And ev'ry minute bless the King And wise Creator of each thing. I ask not why he did remove To happy Mamre's holy grove, Leaving the cities of the plain To Lot and his successless train? All various lusts in cities still Are found; they are the thrones of ill, The dismal sinks, where blood is spill'd, Cages with much uncleanness fill'd: But rural shades are the sweet sense Of piety and innocence; They are the meek's calm region, where Angels descend and rule the sphere; Where Heaven lies leiguer, and the Dove Duly as dew comes from above. If Eden be on Earth at all, 'Tis that which we the country call. Unfold! unfold! Take in His light, Who makes thy cares more short than night. The joys which with His day-star rise He deals to all but drowsy eyes; And, what the men of this world miss, Some drops and dews of future bliss. Hark! how His winds have chang'd their note! And with warm whispers call thee out; The frosts are past, the storms are gone, And backward life at last comes on. The lofty groves in express joys Reply unto the turtle's voice; And here in dust and dirt, O here The lilies of His love appear! Early, while yet the dark was gay And gilt with stars, more trim than day, Heav'n's Lily, and the Earth's chaste Rose, The green immortal Branch arose; And in a solitary place Bow'd to His Father His blest face. If this calm season pleased my Prince, Whose fulness no need could evince, Why should not I, poor silly sheep, His hours, as well as practice, keep? Not that His hand is tied to these, From whom Time holds his transient lease But mornings new creations are, When men, all night sav'd by His care, Are still reviv'd; and well He may Expect them grateful with the day. So for that first draught of His hand, Which finish'd heav'n, and sea, and land, The sons of God their thanks did bring, And all the morning stars did sing. Besides, as His part heretofore The firstlings were of all that bore So now each day from all He saves Their soul's first thoughts and fruits He craves. This makes Him daily shed and show'r His graces at this early hour; Which both His care and kindness show, Cheering the good, quickening the slow. As holy friends mourn at delay, And think each minute an hour's stay, So His Divine and loving Dove With longing throes doth heave and move, And soar about us while we sleep; Sometimes quite through that lock doth peep, And shine, but always without fail, Before the slow sun can unveil, In new compassions breaks, like light, And morning-looks, which scatter night. And wilt Thou let Thy creature be, When Thou hast watch'd, asleep to Thee? Why to unwelcome loath'd surprises Dost leave him, having left his vices? Since these, if suffer'd, may again Lead back the living to the slain. O, change this scourge; or, if as yet None less will my transgressions fit, Dissolve, dissolve! Death cannot do What I would not submit unto. The original has throws . Fair vessel of our daily light, whose proud And previous glories gild that blushing cloud; Whose lively fires in swift projections glance From hill to hill, and by refracted chance Burnish some neighbour-rock, or tree, and then Fly off in coy and wingd flames again: If thou this day Hold on thy way, Know, I have got a greater light than thine; A light, whose shade and back-parts make thee shine. Then get thee down! then get thee down! I have a Sun now of my own. Those nicer livers, who without thy rays Stir not abroad, those may thy lustre praise; And wanting light light, which no wants doth know To thee weak shiner! like blind Persians bow. But where that Sun, which tramples on thy head, From His own bright eternal eye doth shed One living ray, There thy dead day Is needless, and man to a light made free, Which shows that thou canst neither show nor see. Then get thee down! then get thee down! I have a Sun now of my own. Written in the year . Peace? and to all the world? Sure One, And He the Prince of Peace, hath none! He travels to be born, and then Is born to travel more again. Poor Galilee! thou canst not be The place for His Nativity. His restless mother's call'd away, And not deliver'd till she pay. A tax? 'tis so still! we can see The Church thrive in her misery, And, like her Head at Beth'lem, rise, When she, oppress'd with troubles, lies. Rise? should all fall, we cannot be In more extremities than He. Great Type of passions! Come what will, Thy grief exceeds all copies still. Thou cam'st from Heav'n to Earth, that we Might go from Earth to Heav'n with Thee: And though Thou found'st no welcome here, Thou didst provide us mansions there. A stable was Thy Court, and when Men turn'd to beasts, beasts would be men: They were Thy courtiers; others none; And their poor manger was Thy throne. No swaddling silks Thy limbs did fold, Though Thou couldst turn Thy rays to gold. No rockers waited on Thy birth, No cradles stirr'd, nor songs of mirth; But her chaste lap and sacred breast, Which lodg'd Thee first, did give Thee rest. But stay: what light is that doth stream And drop here in a gilded beam? It is Thy star runs page, and brings Thy tributary Eastern kings. Lord! grant some light to us, that we May with them find the way to Thee! Behold what mists eclipse the day! How dark it is! Shed down one ray, To guide us out of this dark night, And say once more, Let there be light! So, stick up ivy and the bays, And then restore the heathen ways. Green will remind you of the spring, Though this great day denies the thing; And mortifies the earth, and all But your wild revels, and loose hall. Could you wear flow'rs, and roses strow Blushing upon your breasts' warm snow, That very dress your lightness will Rebuke, and wither at the ill. The brightness of this day we owe Not unto music, masque, nor show, Nor gallant furniture, nor plate, But to the manger's mean estate. His life while here, as well as birth, Was but a check to pomp and mirth; And all man's greatness you may see Condemned by His humility. Then leave your open house and noise, To welcome Him with holy joys, And the poor shepherds' watchfulness, Whom light and hymns from Heav'n did bless. What you abound with, cast abroad To those that want, and ease your load. Who empties thus, will bring more in; But riot is both loss and sin. Dress finely what comes not in sight, And then you keep your Christmas right. O thou who didst deny to me This world's ador'd felicity, And ev'ry big imperious lust, Which fools admire in sinful dust, With those fine subtle twists, that tie Their bundles of foul gallantry Keep still my weak eyes from the shine Of those gay things which are not Thine! And shut my ears against the noise Of wicked, though applauded, joys! For Thou in any land hast store Of shades and coverts for Thy poor; Where from the busy dust and heat, As well as storms, they may retreat. A rock or bush are downy beds, When Thou art there, crowning their heads With secret blessings, or a tire Made of the Comforter's live fire. And when Thy goodness in the dress Of anger will not seem to bless, Yet dost Thou give them that rich rain, Which, as it drops, clears all again. O what kind visits daily pass 'Twixt Thy great self and such poor grass: With what sweet looks doth Thy love shine On those low violets of Thine, While the tall tulip is accurst, And crowns imperial die with thirst! O give me still those secret meals, Those rare repasts which Thy love deals! Give me that joy, which none can grieve, And which in all griefs doth relieve! This is the portion Thy child begs; Not that of rust, and rags, and dregs. Can any tell me what it is? Can you That wind your thoughts into a clue To guide out others, while yourselves stay in, And hug the sin? I, who so long have in it liv'd, That, if I might, In truth I would not be repriev'd, Have neither sight Nor sense that knows These ebbs and flows: But since of all all may be said, And likeliness doth but upbraid And mock the truth, which still is lost In fine conceits, like streams in a sharp frost; I will not strive, nor the rule break, Which doth give losers leave to speak. Then false and foul world, and unknown Ev'n to thy own, Here I renounce thee, and resign Whatever thou canst say is thine. Thou art not Truth! for he that tries Shall find thee all deceit and lies, Thou art not Friendship! for in thee 'Tis but the bait of policy; Which like a viper lodg'd in flow'rs, Its venom through that sweetness pours; And when not so, then always 'tis A fading paint, the short-liv'd bliss Of air and humour; out and in, Like colours in a dolphin's skin; But must not live beyond one day, Or convenience; then away. Thou art not Riches! for that trash, Which one age hoards, the next doth wash And so severely sweep away, That few remember where it lay. So rapid streams the wealthy land About them have at their command; And shifting channels here restore, There break down, what they bank'd before. Thou art not Honour! for those gay Feathers will wear and drop away; And princes to some upstart line Gives new ones, that are full as fine. Thou art not Pleasure! for thy rose Upon a thorn doth still repose; Which, if not cropp'd, will quickly shed, But soon as cropp'd, grows dull and dead. Thou art the sand, which fills one glass, And then doth to another pass; And could I put thee to a stay, Thou art but dust! Then go thy way, And leave me clean and bright, though poor; Who stops thee doth but daub his floor; And, swallow-like, when he hath done, To unknown dwellings must be gone! Welcome, pure thoughts, and peaceful hours, Enrich'd with sunshine and with show'rs; Welcome fair hopes, and holy cares, The not to be repented shares Of time and business; the sure road Unto my last and lov'd abode! O supreme Bliss! Of blessings, never let me miss Nor leave that path which leads to Thee, Who art alone all things to me! I hear, I see, all the long day The noise and pomp of the broad way. I note their coarse and proud approaches, Their silks, perfumes, and glittering coaches. But in the narrow way to Thee I observe only poverty, And despis'd things; and all along The ragged, mean, and humble throng Are still on foot; and as they go They sigh, and say, their Lord went so. Give me my staff then, as it stood When green and growing in the wood; Those stones, which for the altar serv'd, Might not be smooth'd, nor finely carv'd With this poor stick I'll pass the ford, As Jacob did; and Thy dear word, As Thou hast dress'd it, not as wit And deprav'd tastes have poison'd it, Shall in the passage be my meat, And none else will Thy servant eat. Thus, thus, and in no other sort, Will I set forth, though laugh'd at for't; And leaving the wise world their way, Go through, though judg'd to go astray. From fruitful beds and flow'ry borders, Parcell'd to wasteful ranks and orders, Where State grasps more than plain Truth needs, And wholesome herbs are starv'd by weeds, To the wild woods I will be gone, And the coarse meals of great Saint John. When truth and piety are miss'd Both in the rulers and the priest; When pity is not cold, but dead, And the rich eat the poor like bread; While factious heads with open coil And force, first make, then share, the spoil; To Horeb then Elias goes, And in the desert grows the rose. Hail crystal fountains and fresh shades, Where no proud look invades, No busy worldling hunts away The sad retirer all the day! Hail, happy, harmless solitude! Our sanctuary from the rude And scornful world; the calm recess Of faith, and hope, and holiness! Here something still like Eden looks; Honey in woods, juleps in brooks, And flow'rs, whose rich, unrifled sweets With a chaste kiss the cool dew greets, When the toils of the day are done, And the tir'd world sets with the sun. Here flying winds and flowing wells Are the wise, watchful hermit's bells; Their busy murmurs all the night To praise or prayer do invite, And with an awful sound arrest, And piously employ his breast. When in the East the dawn doth blush, Here cool, fresh spirits the air brush; Herbs straight get up, flow'rs peep and spread, Trees whisper praise, and bow the head: Birds, from the shades of night releas'd, Look round about, then quit the nest, And with united gladness sing The glory of the morning's King. The hermit hears, and with meek voice Offers his own up, and their joys: Then prays that all the world may be Bless'd with as sweet an unity. If sudden storms the day invade, They flock about him to the shade: Where wisely they expect the end, Giving the tempest time to spend; And hard by shelters on some bough Hilarion's servant, the sage crow. O purer years of light and grace! The diff'rence is great as the space 'Twixt you and us, who blindly run After false fires, and leave the sun. Is not fair Nature of herself Much richer than dull paint or pelf? And are not streams at the spring-head More sweet than in carv'd stone or lead? But fancy and some artist's tools Frame a religion for fools. The truth, which once was plainly taught, With thorns and briars now is fraught. Some part is with bold fables spotted, Some by strange comments wildly blotted; And Discord old Corruption's crest With blood and blame hath stain'd the rest. So snow, which in its first descents A whiteness, like pure Heav'n, presents, When touch'd by man is quickly soil'd, And after, trodden down and spoil'd. O lead me, where I may be free In truth and spirit to serve Thee! Where undisturb'd I may converse With Thy great Self; and there rehearse Thy gifts with thanks; and from Thy store, Who art all blessings, beg much more. Give me the wisdom of the bee, And her unwearied industry! That from the wild gourds of these days, I may extract health, and Thy praise, Who canst turn darkness into light, And in my weakness show Thy might. Suffer me not in any want To seek refreshment from a plant Thou didst not set; since all must be Pluck'd up, whose growth is not from Thee. 'Tis not the garden, and the bow'rs, Nor sense and forms, that give to flow'rs Their wholesomeness, but Thy good will, Which truth and pureness purchase still. Then since corrupt man hath driv'n hence Thy kind and saving influence, And balm is no more to be had In all the coasts of Gilead; Go with me to the shade and cell, Where Thy best servants once did dwell. There let me know Thy will, and see Exil'd Religion own'd by Thee; For Thou canst turn dark grots to halls, And make hills blossom like the vales; Decking their untill'd heads with flow'rs, And fresh delights for all sad hours; Till from them, like a laden bee, I may fly home, and hive with Thee Farewell, thou true and tried reflection Of the still poor, and meek election: Farewell, soul's joy, the quick'ning health Of spirits, and their secret wealth! Farewell, my morning-star, the bright And dawning looks of the True Light! O blessed shiner, tell me whither Thou wilt be gone, when night comes hither! A ser that observ'd thee in Thy course, and watch'd the growth of sin, Hath giv'n his judgment, and foretold, That westward hence thy course will hold; And when the day with us is done, There fix, and shine a glorious sun. O hated shades and darkness! when You have got here the sway again, And like unwholesome fogs withstood The light, and blasted all that's good, Who shall the happy shepherds be, To watch the next nativity Of truth and brightness, and make way For the returning, rising day? O what year will bring back our bliss? Or who shall live, when God doth this? Of all, that for Thee are oppress'd! Send down the Spirit of Thy truth, That Spirit, which the tender youth, And first growths of Thy Spouse did spread Through all the world, from one small head! Then if to blood we must resist, Let Thy mild Dove, and our High-Priest, Help us, when man proves false or frowns, To bear the Cross, and save our crowns. O honour those that honour Thee! Make babes to still the enemy! And teach an infant of few days To perfect by his death Thy praise! Let none defile what Thou didst wed, Nor tear the garland from her head! But chaste and cheerful let her die, And precious in the Bridegroom's eye So to Thy glory and her praise, These last shall be her brightest days. Revel chap. last, vers. . What clouds, Menalcas, do oppress thy brow, Flow'rs in a sunshine never look so low? Is Nisa still cold flint? or have thy lambs Met with the fox by straying from their dams? Ah, Damon, no! my lambs are safe; and she Is kind, and much more white than they can be. But what doth life when most serene afford Without a worm which gnaws her fairest gourd? Our days of gladness are but short reliefs, Giv'n to reserve us for enduring griefs: So smiling calms close tempests breed, which break Like spoilers out, and kill our flocks when weak. I heard last May and May is still high Spring The pleasant Philomel her vespers sing. The green wood glitter'd with the golden sun. And all the west like silver shin'd; not one Black cloud; no rags, nor spots did stain The welkin's beauty; nothing frown'd like rain. But ere night came, that scene of fine sights turn'd To fierce dark show'rs; the air with lightnings burn'd; The wood's sweet syren, rudely thus oppress'd, Gave to the storm her weak and weary breast. I saw her next day on her last cold bed: And Daphnis so, just so is Daphnis, dead! So violets, so doth the primrose, fall, At once the Spring's pride, and its funeral. Such easy sweets get off still in their prime, And stay not here to wear the soil of time; While coarser flow'rs, which none would miss, if past, To scorching Summers and cold Autumns last. Souls need not time. The early forward things Are always fledg'd, and gladly use their wings. Or else great parts, when injur'd, quit the crowd, To shine above still, not behind, the cloud. And is't not just to leave those to the night That madly hate and persecute the light? And inwardly are true black Moors indeed? The punishment still manifests the sin, As outward signs show the disease within. While worth oppress'd mounts to a nobler height, And palm-like bravely overtops the weight. So where swift Isca from our lofty hills With loud farewells descends, and foaming fills A wider channel, like some great port-vein With large rich streams to fill the humble plain: I saw an oak, whose stately height and shade, Projected far, a goodly shelter made; And from the top with thick diffusd boughs In distant rounds grew like a wood-nymph's house. Here many garlands won at roundel-lays Old shepherds hung up in those happy days With knots and girdles, the dear spoils and dress Of such bright maids as did true lovers bless. And many times had old Amphion made His beauteous flock acquainted with this shade: His flock, whose fleeces were as smooth and white As those the welkin shows in moonshine night. Here, when the careless world did sleep, have I In dark records and numbers nobly high, The visions of our black, but brightest bard From old Amphion's mouth full often heard; With all those plagues poor shepherds since have known, And riddles more, which future time must own: While on his pipe young Hylas play'd, and made Music as solemn as the song and shade. But the curs'd owner from the trembling top To the firm brink did all those branches lop; And in one hour what many years had bred, The pride and beauty of the plain, lay dead. The undone swains in sad songs mourn'd their loss, While storms and cold winds did improve the cross; But nature, which like virtue scorns to yield, Brought new recruits and succours to the field; For by next spring the check'd sap wak'd from sleep, And upwards still to feel the sun did creep; Till at those wounds, the hated hewer made, There sprang a thicker and a fresher shade. So thrives afflicted Truth, and so the light When put out gains a value from the night. How glad are we, when but one twinkling star Peeps betwixt clouds more black than is our tar: And Providence was kind, that order'd this To the brave suff'rer should be solid bliss: Nor is it so till this short life be done, But goes hence with him, and is still his sun. Come, shepherds, then, and with your greenest bays Refresh his dust, who lov'd your learnd lays. Bring here the florid glories of the spring, And, as you strew them, pious anthems sing, Which to your children and the years to come While prostrate I drop on his quiet urn My tears, not gifts; and like the poor that mourn With green but humble turfs, write o'er his hearse For false, foul prose-men this fair truth in verse. Here Daphnis sleeps, and while the great watch goes Of loud and restless Time, takes his repose. Fame is but noise; all Learning but a thought; Which one admires, another sets at nought, Nature mocks both, and Wit still keeps ado: But Death brings knowledge and assurance too. Cast in your garlands! strew on all the flow'rs, Which May with smiles or April feeds with show'rs, Let this day's rites as steadfast as the sun Keep pace with Time and through all ages run; The public character and famous test Of our long sorrows and his lasting rest. And when we make procession on the plains, Or yearly keep the holiday of swains, Let Daphnis still be the recorded name, And solemn honour of our feasts and fame. For though the Isis and the prouder Thames Can show his relics lodg'd hard by their streams: And must for ever to the honour'd name Of noble Murrey chiefly owe that fame: Yet here his stars first saw him, and when Fate Beckon'd him hence, it knew no other date. Nor will these vocal woods and valleys fail, Nor Isca's louder streams, this to bewail; But while swains hope, and seasons change, will glide With moving murmurs because Daphnis died. A fatal sadness, such as still foregoes, Then runs along with public plagues and woes, Lies heavy on us; and the very light, Turn'd mourner too, hath the dull looks of night. Our vales, like those of death, a darkness show More sad than cypress or the gloomy yew; And on our hills, where health with height complied, Thick drowsy mists hang round, and there reside. Not one short parcel of the tedious year In its old dress and beauty doth appear. Flow'rs hate the spring, and with a sullen bend Thrust down their heads, which to the root still tend. And though the sun, like a cold lover, peeps A little at them, still the day's-eye sleeps. But when the Crab and Lion with acute And active fires their sluggish heat recruit, Our grass straight russets, and each scorching day Drinks up our brooks as fast as dew in May; Till the sad herdsman with his cattle faints, And empty channels ring with loud complaints. Heaven's just displeasure, and our unjust ways, Change Nature's course; bring plagues, dearth, and decays. This turns our lands to dust, the skies to brass, Makes old kind blessings into curses pass: And when we learn unknown and foreign crimes, Brings in the vengeance due unto those climes. The dregs and puddle of all ages now, Like rivers near their fall, on us do flow. Ah, happy Daphnis! who while yet the streams Ran clear and warm, though but with setting beams, Got through, and saw by that declining light, His toil's and journey's end before the night. A night, where darkness lays her chains and bars, And feral fires appear instead of stars. But he, along with the last looks of day, Went hence, and setting sunlike pass'd away. What future storms our present sins do hatch Some in the dark discern, and others watch; Though foresight makes no hurricane prove mild, Fury that's long fermenting is most wild. But see, while thus our sorrows we discourse, Ph bus hath finish'd his diurnal course; The shades prevail: each bush seems bigger grown; Darkness like State makes small things swell and frown: The hills and woods with pipes and sonnets round, And bleating sheep our swains drive home, resound. What voice from yonder lawn tends hither? Hark! 'Tis Thyrsis calls! I hear Lycanthe bark! His flocks left out so late, and weary grown, Are to the thickets gone, and there laid down. Menalcas, haste to look them out! poor sheep, When day is done, go willingly to sleep: And could bad man his time spend as they do, He might go sleep, or die, as willing too. Farewell! kind Damon! now the shepherd's star With beauteous looks smiles on us, though from far. All creatures that were favourites of day Are with the sun retir'd and gone away. While feral birds send forth unpleasant notes, And night the nurse of thoughts sad thoughts promotes: But joy will yet come with the morning light, Though sadly now we bid good night! Good night! As kings do rule like th' heavens, who dispense To parts remote and near their influence; So doth our Charles move also; while he posts From south to north, and back to southern coasts; Like to the starry orb, which in its round Moves to those very points; but while 'tis bound For north, there is some guess a trembling fit And shivering in the part that's opposite. What were our fears and pantings, what dire fame Heard we of Irish tumults, sword, and flame! Which now we think but blessings, as being sent Only as matter, whereupon 'twas meant, The British thus united might express, The strength of joind Powers to suppress, Or conquer foes. This is Great Britain's bliss; The island in itself a just world is. Here no commotion shall we find or fear, But of the Court's removal, no sad tear Or cloudy brow, but when you leave us. Then Discord is loyalty professd, when Nations do strive, which shall the happier be T' enjoy your bounteous rays of majesty Which yet you throw in undivided dart, For things divine allow no share or part. The same kind virtue doth at once disclose The beauty of their thistle and our rose. Thus you do mingle souls and firmly knit What were but join'd before; you Scotsmen fit Closely with us, and reuniter prove; You fetch'd the crown before, and now their love. Sure Priam will to mirth incline, And all that are of Priam's line. Feeding on fruits which in the heavens do grow, Whence all divine and holy counsels flow. Excel then if thou canst, be not withstood, But strive and overcome the evil with good. You minister to others' wounds a cure, But leave your own all rotten and impure. Chance, taking from me things of highest price, At a dear rate hath taught me to be wise. Than the vain buzzing of so many flies. His deep, dark heart bent to supplant Is iron, or else adamant. What though they boast their riches unto us? Those cannot say that they are virtuous. From Of the Diseases of the Mind and the Body : translated from That man for misery excell'd All creatures which the wide world held. A tender kid see, where 'tis put I on the hills did slay, Now dress'd and into quarters cut, A pleasant, dainty prey. O health, the chief of gifts divine! I would I might with thee and thine Live all those days appointed mine! Draw near, fond man, and dress thee by this glass, Mark how thy bravery and big looks must pass Into corruption, rottenness and dust; The frail supporters which betray'd thy trust. O weigh in time thy last and loathsome state! To purchase heav'n for tears is no hard rate. Our glory, greatness, wisdom, all we have, If mis-employ'd, but add hell to the grave: Only a fair redemption of evil times Finds life in death, and buries all our crimes. My soul, my pleasant soul, and witty, The guest and consort of my body. Into what place now all alone Naked and sad wilt thou be gone? No mirth, no wit, as heretofore, Nor jests wilt thou afford me more. What is't to me that spacious rivers run Whole ages, and their streams are never done? Those still remain: but all my fathers died, And I myself but for few days abide. In March birds couple, a new birth Of herbs and flow'rs breaks through the earth; But in the grave none stirs his head, Long is the impris'ment of the dead. So our decays God comforts by The stars' concurrent state on high. There are that do believe all things succeed By chance or fortune: and that nought's decreed By a divine, wise Will; but blindly call Old Time and Nature rulers over all. From the first hour the heavens were made Unto the last, when all shall fade, Count if thou canst the drops of dew, The stars of heav'n and streams that flow, The falling snow, the dropping show'rs, And in the month of May, the flow'rs, Their scents and colours, and what store Of grapes and apples Autumn bore, How many grains the Summer bears, What leaves the wind in Winter tears; Count all the creatures in the world, The motes which in the air are hurl'd, The hairs of beasts and mankind, and The shore's innumerable sand, The blades of grass, and to these last Add all the years which now are past, With those whose course is yet to come, And all their minutes in one sum. When all is done, the damned's state Outruns them still, and knows no date. I saw beneath Tarentum's stately towers An old Cilician spend his peaceful hours. Some few bad acres in a waste, wild field, Which neither grass, nor corn, nor vines would yield, He did possess. There amongst thorns and weeds Cheap herbs and coleworts, with the common seeds Of chesboule or tame poppies, he did sow, And vervain with white lilies caused to grow. Content he was, as are successful kings, And late at night come home for long work brings The night still home with unbought messes laid On his low table he his hunger stay'd. Roses he gather'd in the youthful Spring, And apples in the Autumn home did bring: And when the sad, cold Winter burst with frost The stones, and the still streams in ice were lost, He would soft leaves of bear's-foot crop, and chide The slow west winds and ling'ring Summer-tide! And rising at midnight the stars espied, All posting westward in a silent glide. The trees we set grow slowly, and their shade Stays for our sons, while we the planters fade. From Man in Glory : translated from Anselm . Here holy Anselm lives in ev'ry page, And sits archbishop still, to vex the age. Had he foreseen and who knows but he did? This fatal wrack, which deep in time lay hid, 'Tis but just to believe, that little hand Which clouded him, but now benights our land, Had never like Elias driv'n him hence, A sad retirer for a slight offence. For were he now, like the returning year, Restor'd, to view these desolations here, He would do penance for his old complaint, And weeping say, that Rufus was a saint. The whole wench how complete soe'er was but A pleasing witch; a living death; a fair, Thriving disease; a fresh, infectious air; A precious plague; a fury sweetly drawn; Wild fire laid up and finely dress'd in lawn. Peter, when thou this pleasant world dost see, Believe, thou seest mere dreams and vanity, Not real things, but false, and through the air Each-where an empty, slipp'ry scene, though fair. The chirping birds, the fresh woods' shady boughs, The leaves' shrill whispers, when the west wind blows, The swift, fierce greyhounds coursing on the plains, The flying hare, distress'd 'twixt fear and pains, The bloomy maid decking with flow'rs her head, The gladsome, easy youth by light love led; And whatsoe'er here with admiring eyes Thou seem'st to see, 'tis but a frail disguise Worn by eternal things, a passive dress Put on by beings that are passiveless. The naked man too gets the field, And often makes the armd foe to yield. Or lions' teeth, which makes them loudly mourn; Some others seem unto themselves to die; Some climb steep solitudes and mountains high, From whence they seem to fall inanely down, Panting with fear, till wak'd, and scarce their own They feel about them if in bed they lie, Deceiv'd with dreams, and Night's imagery. In vain with earnest strugglings they contend To ease themselves: for when they stir and bend Their greatest force to do it, even then most Of all they faint, and in their hopes are cross'd. Nor tongue, nor hand, nor foot will serve their turn, But without speech and strength within, they mourn. Thou the nepenthe easing grief Art, and the mind's healing relief. Base man! and couldst thou think Cato alone Wants courage to be dry? and but him, none? Look'd I so soft? breath'd I such base desires, Not proof against this Lybic sun's weak fires? That shame and plague on thee more justly lie! To drink alone, when all our troops are dry. For with brave rage he flung it on the sand, And the spilt draught suffic'd each thirsty band And will not bear the cry Of distress'd man, nor shut his weeping eye It lives when kill'd, and brancheth when 'tis lopp'd. Like some fair oak, that when her boughs Are cut by rude hands, thicker grows; And from those wounds the iron made Resumes a rich and fresher shade. Patience digesteth misery. They fain would if they might Descend to hide themselves in Hell. So light Of foot is Vengeance; and so near to sin, That soon as done, the actors do begin To fear and suffer by themselves: Death moves Before their eyes; sad dens and dusky groves They haunt, and hope vain hope which Fear doth guide! That those dark shades their inward guilt can hide. But night and day doth his own life molest, And bears his judge and witness in his breast. Virtue's fair cares some people measure For poisonous works that hinder pleasure. Man should with virtue arm'd and hearten'd be, And innocently watch his enemy: For fearless freedom, which none can control, Is gotten by a pure and upright soul. Whose guilty soul, with terrors fraught, doth frame New torments still, and still doth blow that flame Which still burns him, nor sees what end can be Of his dire plagues, and fruitful penalty; But fears them living, and fears more to die; Which makes his life a constant tragedy. And for life's sake to lose the crown of life. Nature even for herself doth lay a snare, And handsome faces their own traitors are. True life in this is shown, To live for all men's good, not for our own. So thy wise tongue doth comfort the oppress'd. All worldly things, even while they grow, decay; As smoke doth, by ascending, waste away. To live a stranger unto life. Whose hissings fright all Nature's monstrous ills; His eye darts death, more swift than poison kills. All monsters by instinct to him give place, They fly for life, for death lives in his face; And he alone by Nature's hid commands Reigns paramount, and prince of all the sands. The plenteous evils of frail life fill the old: Their wasted limbs the loose skin in dry folds Doth hang about: their joints are numb'd, and through Their veins, not blood, but rheums and waters flow. Their trembling bodies with a staff they stay, Nor do they breathe, but sadly sigh all day. Thoughts tire their hearts, to them their very mind Is a disease; their eyes no sleep can find. Against the virtuous man we all make head, And hate him while he lives, but praise him dead. Long life, oppress'd with many woes, Meets more, the further still it goes. What greater good had deck'd great Pompey's crown Than death, if in his honours fully blown, And mature glories he had died? those piles Of huge success, loud fame, and lofty styles Built in his active youth, long lazy life Saw quite demolish'd by ambitious strife. He lived to wear the weak and melting snow Of luckless age, where garlands seldom grow, But by repining Fate torn from the head Which wore them once, are on another shed. Whom God doth take care for, and love, He dies young here, to live above. Sickness and death, you are but sluggish things, And cannot reach a heart that hath got wings. Let me not weep to see thy ravish'd house All sad and silent, without lord or spouse, And all those vast dominions once thine own Torn 'twixt a hundred slaves to me unknown. How could that paper sent, That luckless paper, merit thy contempt? Ev'n foe to foe though furiously replies, And the defied his enemy defies. Amidst the swords and wounds, there's a salute, Rocks answer man, and though hard are not mute. The trees and leaves speak trembling to the wind. If thou dost fear discoveries, and the blot Of my love, Tanaquil shall know it not. Obdurate still and tongue-tied, you accuse Though yours is ever vocal my dull muse; You blame my lazy, lurking life, and add I scorn your love, a calumny most sad; Then tell me, that I fear my wife, and dart Harsh, cutting words against my dearest heart. Leave, learnd father, leave this bitter course, My studies are not turn'd unto the worse; I am not mad, nor idle, nor deny Your great deserts, and my debt, nor have I A wife like Tanaquil, as wildly you Object, but a Lucretia, chaste and true. This pledge of your joint love, to heaven now fled, With honey-combs and milk of life is fed. Or with the Bethlem babes whom Herod's rage Kill'd in their tender, happy, holy age Doth walk the groves of Paradise, and make Garlands, which those young martyrs from him take. With these his eyes on the mild Lamb are fix'd, A virgin-child with virgin-infants mix'd. Such is my Celsus too, who soon as given, Was taken back on the eighth day to heaven To whom at Alcala I sadly gave Amongst the martyrs' tombs a little grave. He now with yours gone both the blessed way Amongst the trees of life doth smile and play; And this one drop of our mix'd blood may be A light for my Therasia, and for me. Sweet Paulinus, and is thy nature turn'd? Have I so long in vain thy absence mourn'd? Wilt thou, my glory, and great Rome's delight, The Senate's prop, their oracle, and light, In Bilbilis and Calagurris dwell, Changing thy ivory-chair for a dark cell? Wilt bury there thy purple, and contemn All the great honours of thy noble stem? Shall I believe you can make me return, Who pour your fruitless prayers when you mourn, Not to your Maker? Who can hear you cry, But to the fabled nymphs of Castaly? You never shall by such false gods bring me Either to Rome, or to your company. As for those former things you once did know, And which you still call mine, I freely now Confess, I am not he, whom you knew then; I have died since, and have been born again. Nor dare I think my sage instructor can Believe it error, for redeemd man To serve his great Redeemer. I grieve not But glory so to err. Let the wise knot Of worldlings call me fool; I slight their noise, And hear my God approving of my choice. Man is but glass, a building of no trust, A moving shade, and, without Christ, mere dust. His choice in life concerns the chooser much: For when he dies, his good or ill just such As here it was goes with him hence, and stays Still by him, his strict judge in the last days. These serious thoughts take up my soul, and I, While yet 'tis daylight, fix my busy eye Upon His sacred rules, life's precious sum Who in the twilight of the world shall come To judge the lofty looks, and show mankind The diff'rence 'twixt the ill and well inclin'd. This second coming of the world's great King Makes my heart tremble, and doth timely bring A saving care into my watchful soul, Lest in that day all vitiated and foul I should be found that day, Time's utmost line, When all shall perish but what is divine; When the great trumpet's mighty blast shall shake The earth's foundations, till the hard rocks quake And melt like piles of snow; when lightnings move Like hail, and the white thrones are set above: That day, when sent in glory by the Father, The Prince of Life His blest elect shall gather; Millions of angels round about Him flying, While all the kindreds of the Earth are crying; And He enthron'd upon the clouds shall give His last just sentence, who must die, who live. This is the fear, this is the saving care That makes me leave false honours, and that share Which fell to me of this frail world, lest by A frequent use of present pleasures I Should quite forget the future, and let in Foul atheism, or some presumptuous sin. Now by their loss I have secur'd my life, And bought my peace ev'n with the cause of strife. I live to Him Who gave me life and breath, And without fear expect the hour of death. If you like this, bid joy to my rich state, If not, leave me to Christ at any rate. And is the bargain thought too dear, To give for heaven our frail subsistence here? To change our mortal with immortal homes, And purchase the bright stars with darksome stones? Behold! my God a rate great as His breath! On the sad cross bought me with bitter death, Did put on flesh, and suffer'd for our good, For ours vile slaves! the loss of His dear blood. Life, Marcellina, leaving thy fair frame, Thou didst contemn those tombs of costly fame, Built by thy Roman ancestors, and liest At Milan, where great Ambrose sleeps in Christ. Hope, the dead's life, and faith, which never faints, Made thee rest here, that thou mayst rise with saints. You that to wash your flesh and souls draw near, Ponder these two examples set you here: Great Martin shows the holy life, and white, Paulinus to repentance doth invite; Martin's pure, harmless life, took heaven by force, Paulinus took it by tears and remorse; Martin leads through victorious palms and flow'rs, Paulinus leads you through the pools and show'rs; You that are sinners, on Paulinus look, You that are saints, great Martin is your book; The first example bright and holy is, The last, though sad and weeping, leads to bliss Here the great well-spring of wash'd souls with beams Of living light quickens the lively streams; The Dove descends, and stirs them with her wings, So weds these waters to the upper springs. They straight conceive; a new birth doth proceed From the bright streams by an immortal seed. O the rare love of God! sinners wash'd here Come forth pure saints, all justified and clear. So blest in death and life, man dies to sins, And lives to God: sin dies, and life begins To be reviv'd: old Adam falls away And the new lives, born for eternal sway. Through pleasant green fields enter you the way To bliss; and well through shades and blossoms may The walks lead here, from whence directly lies The good man's path to sacred Paradise. The painful cross with flowers and palms is crown'd, Which prove, it springs; though all in blood 'tis drown'd; The doves above it show with one consent, Heaven opens only to the innocent. You see what splendour through the spacious aisle, As if the Church were glorified, doth smile. The ivory-wrought beams seem to the sight Engraven, while the carv'd roof looks curl'd and bright. On brass hoops to the upmost vaults we tie The hovering lamps, which nod and tremble by The yielding cords; fresh oil doth still repair The waving flames, vex'd with the fleeting air. The pains of Saints and Saints' rewards are twins, The sad cross, and the crown which the cross wins. Here Christ, the Prince both of the cross and crown, Amongst fresh groves and lilies fully blown Stands, a white Lamb bearing the purple cross: White shows His pureness, red His blood's dear loss. To ease His sorrows the chaste turtle sings, And fans Him, sweating blood, with her bright wings; While from a shining cloud the Father eyes His Son's sad conflict with His enemies, And on His blessed head lets gently down Eternal glory made into a crown. About Him stand two flocks of diff'ring notes, One of white sheep, and one of speckled goats; The first possess His right hand, and the last Stand on His left; the spotted goats are cast All into thick, deep shades, while from His right The white sheep pass into a whiter light. Those sacred days by tedious Time delay'd, While the slow years' bright line about is laid, I patiently expect, though much distrest By busy longing and a love-sick breast. I wish they may outshine all other days; Or, when they come, so recompense delays As to outlast the summer hours' bright length; Or that fam'd day, when stopp'd by divine strength The sun did tire the world with his long light, Doubling men's labours, and adjourning night. As the bright sky with stars, the field with flow'rs, The years with diff'ring seasons, months and hours, God hath distinguishd and mark'd, so He With sacred feasts did ease and beautify The working days: because that mixture may Make men loth to be holy ev'ry day After long labours, with a freer will, Adore their Maker, and keep mindful still Of holiness, by keeping holy days: For otherwise they would dislike the ways Of piety as too severe. To cast Old customs quite off, and from sin to fast Is a great work. To run which way we will, On plains is easy, not so up a hill. Hence 'tis our good God Who would all men bring Under the covert of His saving wing Appointed at set times His solemn feasts, That by mean services men might at least Take hold of Christ as by the hem, and steal Help from His lowest skirts, their souls to heal. For the first step to heaven is to live well All our life long, and each day to excel In holiness; but since that tares are found In the best corn, and thistles will confound And prick my heart with vain cares, I will strive To weed them out on feast-days, and so thrive By handfuls, 'till I may full life obtain, And not be swallow'd of eternal pain. Come, my true consort in my joys and care! Let this uncertain and still wasting share Of our frail life be giv'n to God. You see How the swift days drive hence incessantly, And the frail, drooping world though still thought gay In secret, slow consumption wears away. All that we have pass from us, and once past Return no more; like clouds, they seem to last, And so delude loose, greedy minds. But where Are now those trim deceits? to what dark sphere Are all those false fires sunk, which once so shin'd, They captivated souls, and rul'd mankind? He that with fifty ploughs his lands did sow, Will scarce be trusted for two oxen now; His rich, loud coach, known to each crowded street, Is sold, and he quite tir'd walks on his feet. Merchants that like the sun their voyage made From East to West, and by wholesale did trade, Are now turn'd sculler-men, or sadly sweat In a poor fisher's boat, with line and net. Kingdoms and cities to a period tend; Earth nothing hath, but what must have an end; Mankind by plagues, distempers, dearth and war, Tortures and prisons, die both near and far; Fury and hate rage in each living breast, Princes with princes, States with States contest; An universal discord mads each land, Peace is quite lost, the last times are at hand. But were these days from the Last Day secure, So that the world might for more years endure, Yet we like hirelings should our term expect, And on our day of death each day reflect. For what Therasia doth it us avail That spacious streams shall flow and never fail, That aged forests hie to tire the winds, And flow'rs each Spring return and keep their kinds! Those still remain: but all our fathers died, And we ourselves but for few days abide. This short time then was not giv'n us in vain, To whom Time dies, in which we dying gain, But that in time eternal life should be Our care, and endless rest our industry. And yet this task, which the rebellious deem Too harsh, who God's mild laws for chains esteem, Suits with the meek and harmless heart so right That 'tis all ease, all comfort and delight. To love our God with all our strength and will; To covet nothing; to devise no ill Against our neighbours; to procure or do Nothing to others, which we would not to Our very selves; not to revenge our wrong; To be content with little, not to long For wealth and greatness; to despise or jeer No man, and if we be despised, to bear; To feed the hungry; to hold fast our crown; To take from others naught; to give our own, What is so hard, but faith can do with ease? He that the holy prophets doth believe, And on God's words relies, words that still live And cannot die; that in his heart hath writ His Saviour's death and triumph, and doth yet With constant care, admitting no neglect, His second, dreadful coming still expect: To such a liver earthy things are dead, With Heav'n alone, and hopes of Heav'n, he's fed, He is no vassal unto worldly trash, Nor that black knowledge which pretends to wash, But doth defile: a knowledge, by which men With studied care lose Paradise again. Commands and titles, the vain world's device, With gold the forward seed of sin and vice He never minds: his aim is far more high, And stoops to nothing lower than the sky. Nor grief, nor pleasures breed him any pain, He nothing fears to lose, would nothing gain, Whatever hath not God, he doth detest, He lives to Christ, is dead to all the rest. This Holy One sent hither from above A virgin brought forth, shadow'd by the Dove; His skin with stripes, with wicked hands His face And with foul spittle soil'd and beaten was; A crown of thorns His blessed head did wound. Nails pierc'd His hands and feet, and He fast bound Stuck to the painful Cross, where hang'd till dead, With a cold spear His heart's dear blood was shed. All this for man, for bad, ungrateful man, The true God suffer'd! not that suff'rings can Add to His glory aught, Who can receive Access from nothing, Whom none can bereave Of His all-fulness: but the blest design Of His sad death was to save me from mine: He dying bore my sins, and the third day His early rising rais'd me from the clay. To such great mercies what shall I prefer, Or who from loving God shall me deter? Burn me alive, with curious, skilful pain, Cut up and search each warm and breathing vein; When all is done, death brings a quick release, And the poor mangled body sleeps in peace. Hale me to prisons, shut me up in brass, My still free soul from thence to God shall pass. Banish or bind me, I can be nowhere A stranger, nor alone; my God is there. I fear not famine; how can he be said To starve who feeds upon the Living Bread? And yet this courage springs not from my store, Christ gave it me, Who can give much, much more I of myself can nothing dare or do, He bids me fight, and makes me conquer too. If like great Abr'ham I should have command To leave my father's house and native land, I would with joy to unknown regions run, Bearing the banner of His blessed Son. On worldly goods I will have no design, But use my own, as if mine were not mine; Wealth I'll not wonder at, nor greatness seek, But choose though laugh'd at to be poor and meek. In woe and wealth I'll keep the same staid mind, Grief shall not break me, nor joys make me blind: My dearest Jesus I'll still praise, and He Shall with songs of deliv'rance compass me. Then come, my faithful consort! join with me In this good fight, and my true helper be; Cheer me when sad, advise me when I stray, Let us be each the other's guide and stay; Be your lord's guardian: give joint aid and due, Help him when fall'n, rise, when he helpeth you, That so we may not only one flesh be, But in one spirit and one will agree. Where'er my fancy calls, there I go still, Not sworn a slave to any master's will. There's need, betwixt his clothes, his bed and board, Of all that Earth and Sea and Air afford. With restless cares they waste the night and day, To compass great estates, and get the sway. Whenever did, I pray, One lion take another's life away? Or in what forest did a wild boar by The tusks of his own fellow wounded die? Tigers with tigers never have debate; And bears among themselves abstain from hate Unless they may drink up the blood they spill: Who do believe that hands, and hearts, and heads, Are but a kind of meat, etc. The strongest body and the best Cannot subsist without due rest. Time's-Teller wrought into a little round, Which count'st the days and nights with watchful sound; How when once fix'd with busy wheels dost thou The twice twelve useful hours drive on and show; And where I go, go'st with me without strife, The monitor and ease of fleeting life. The untired strength of never-ceasing motion, A restless rest, a toilless operation, Heaven then had given it, when wise Nature did To frail and solid things one place forbid; And parting both, made the moon's orb their bound, Damning to various change this lower ground. But now what Nature hath those laws transgress'd, Giving to Earth a work that ne'er will rest? Though 'tis most strange, yet great King 'tis not new: This work was seen and found before, in you. In you, whose mind though still calm never sleeps, But through your realms one constant motion keeps: As your mind then was Heaven's type first, so this But the taught anti-type of your mind is. How oft have we beheld wild beasts appear From broken gulfs of earth, upon some part Of sand that did not sink! How often there And thence, did golden boughs o'er-saffron'd start! Nor only saw we monsters of the wood, But I have seen sea-calves whom bears withstood; And such a kind of beast as might be named A horse, but in most foul proportion framed. That the fierce pard doth at a beck Yield to the yoke his spotted neck, And the untoward tiger bear The whip with a submissive fear; That stags do foam with golden bits. And the rough Libyc bear submits Unto the ring; that a wild boar Like that which Calydon of yore Brought forth, doth mildly put his head In purple muzzles to be led; That the vast, strong-limb'd buffles draw The British chariots with taught awe, And the elephant with courtship falls Would not you think such sports as those Were shows which the gods did expose? But these are nothing, when we see That hares by lions hunted be, etc. Go, solitary wood, and henceforth be Acquainted with no other harmony Than the pie's chattering, or the shrieking note Of boding owls, and fatal raven's throat. Thy sweetest chanter's dead, that warbled forth Lays that might tempests calm, and still the north, And call down angels from their glorious sphere, To hear her songs, and learn new anthems there. That soul is fled, and to Elysium gone, Thou a poor desert left; go then and run. Beg there to want a grove, and if she please To sing again beneath thy shadowy trees, The souls of happy lovers crowned with blisses Shall flock about thee, and keep time with kisses. Lines - are misprinted in the original; they there run: O'er all the tomb a sudden spring: If crimson flowers, whose drooping heads Shall curtain o'er their mournful heads: May never evet nor the toad Within thy banks make their abode! Taking thy journey from the sea, May'st thou ne'er happen in thy way On nitre or on brimstone mine, To spoil thy taste! this spring of thine Let it of nothing taste but earth, And salt conceived, in their birth Be ever fresh! Let no man dare To spoil thy fish, make lock or ware; But on thy margent still let dwell Those flowers which have the sweetest smell. And let the dust upon thy strand Become like Tagus' golden sand. Let as much good betide to thee, As thou hast favour show'd to me. I'll never dig in quarry of a heart To have no part, Nor roast in fiery eyes, which always are The sun wears midnight; day is beetle-brow'd, And lightning is in kelder of a cloud. Since all forms uniform deformity Doth cover; so that we, except God say Another Fiat , shall have no more day. <|endofpoem|> NO eyes shall see the poems that I write For you; not even yours; but after long Forgetful years have passed on our delight Some hand may chance upon a dusty song Of those fond days when every spoken word Was sweet, and all the fleeting things unspoken Yet sweeter, and the music half unheard Murmured through forests as a charm unbroken. It is the plain and ordinary page Of two who loved, sole-spirited and clear. Will you, O stranger of another age, Not grant a human and compassionate tear To us, who each the other held so dear? A single tear fraternal, sadly shed, Since that which was so living, is so dead. LET us go back together to the hills. Weary am I of palaces and courts, Weary of words disloyal to my thoughts, Come, my beloved, let us to the hills. Let us go back together to the land, And wander hand in hand upon the heights; Kings have we seen, and manifold delights, Oh, my beloved, let us to the land! Lone and unshackled, let us to the road Which holds enchantment round each hidden bend, Our course uncompassed and our whim its end, Our feet once more, beloved, to the road! Convalescente di squisiti mali MY spirit like a shepherd boy Goes dancing down the lane. When all the world is young with joy Must I lie here in pain? With shepherd's pipe my spirit fled And cloven foot of Pan; The mortal bondage he has shed And shackling yoke of man. And though he leave me cold and mute, A traitor to his care, I smile to hear his honeyed flute Hang on the scented air. WHEN I am in the Orient once again, And turn into the gay and squalid street, One side in the shadow, one in vivid heat, The thought of England, fresh beneath the rain, Will rise unbidden as a gently pain. The lonely hours of illness, as they beat Crawling through days with slow laborious feet, And I lay gazing through the leaded pane, Idle, and listened to the swallows' cry After the flitting insect swiftly caught, Those all-too-leisured hours as they went by, Stamped as their heritage upon my thought The memory of a square of summer sky Jagged by the gables of a Gothic court. I LEFT thee in the crowds and in the light, And if I laughed or sorrowed none could tell. They could not know our true and deep farewell Was spoken in the long preceding night. Thy mighty shadow in the garden's dip! To others dormant, but to me awake; I saw a window in the moonlight shake, And traced the angle of the gable's lip, And knew thy soul, benign and grave and mild, Towards me, morsel of morality, And grieving at the parting soon to be, A patriarch about to lose a child. For many come and soon their tale is told, And thou remainest, dimly feeling pain, Aware the time draws near to don again The sober mourning of the very old. Pictures and galleries and empty rooms! Small wonder that my games were played alone; Half of the rambling house to call my own, And wooded gardens with mysterious glooms. My fingers ran among the tassels faded; My playmates moved in arrases brocaded; I slept beside the canopied and shaded Beds of forgotten kings. I wandered shoeless in the galleries; I contemplated long the tapestries, And loved the ladies for their histories And hands with many rings. Beneath an oriel window facing south streams, I daily stood and laughing drank the beams, And, catching fistfuls, pressed them in my mouth. This I remember, and the carven oak, The long and polished floors, the many stairs, Th' heraldic windows, and the velvet chairs, And portraits that I knew so well, they almost spoke. So I have loved thee, as a lonely child Might love the kind and venerable sire With whom he lived, and whom at youthful fire Had ever sagely, tolerantly smiled; In whose old weathered brain a boundless store Lay hid of riches never to be spent; Who often to the coaxing child unbent In hours' enchantment of delightful lore. So in the night we parted, friend of years, I rose a stranger to thee on the morrow; Thy stateliness knows neither joy nor sorrow, I will not wound such dignity by tears. I WROTE the burning words to you That meant so much to me. I sent them speeding straight to you, To you across the sea; I waited with sure reckoning For your reply to me. I waited, and the counted day Fruitlessly came and went; I made excuse for the delay, Pitiable confident. I knew to-morrow's light must bring The words you must have sent. And still I stand on that dim verge And look across the sea; The waves have changed into a dirge Their volubility. And in my disillusioned heart Is a little grave for me. But still with shaded eyes I gaze As mournfully I sing, And one by one the trailing days, As they no message bring, Fall with their slow monotony As beads fall from a string. WINE ran; rich yellow wine upon the marble floor Recklessly spilled; the Nubians ran to pour A fresh libation; and to scatter showers Of red rose petals; candles overturned Smouldered among the ruins of the flowers, And overhead swung heavy shadowy bowers Of blue and purple grapes, And strange fantastic shapes Of varied birds, where lanterns hung and dimly burned. The melon and the orange, turned to use As golden balls with laughter lightly tossed, Lay burst and drained of their sweet juice, Uselessly ripened and for ever lost; All glowing as they lay upon the ground, As envious of their fellows, Who, piled in luscious reds and yellows, Enriched the tables all around, The tables low, Sheltering the reclining grace; Here, through the curling smoke, a swarthy face, And here the glow Of red carnation pressed to lips as warmly red. And as they lay in their luxurious ease, Playing with grapes and rose-leaves, slim And willowy slave-girls, in the hope to please, Twisted and danced before them, to the dim Uncertain music in the shadows played; Some came with supple limb, With Mystery's aid And snake-like creep, Others with riotous leap And made festivity to Bacchus wed; And straight black hair hanging in glossy braid, They danced, unnoted, and exhausted fled. Still floated from beneath the acacia-tree The droning Eastern music's minor key. SO prodigal was I of youth, Forgetting I was young; I worshipped dead men for their strength, Forgetting I was strong. I cherished old, jejune advice; I thought I groped for truth; Those dead old languages I learned When I was prodigal of youth! Then in the sunlight stood a boy, Outstretching either hand, Palm upwards, cup-like, and between The fingers trickled sand. Oh, why so grave he cried to me, Laugh, stern lips, laugh at last! Let wisdom come when wisdom may. The sand is running fast. I followed him into the sun, And laughed as he desired, And every day upon the grass We play till we are tired. THAT I should live and look with open eyes I count as half my claim to Paradise. I have not crept beneath cathedral arches, But bathed in streams beneath the silver larches; And have not grovelled to the Sunday priest, But found an unconfined and daily feast; Was called ungodly, and to those who blamed Laughed back defiance and was not ashamed. Some hold their duty to be mournful; why? I cannot love your weeping poets; I Am sad in winter, but in summer gay, And vary with each variable day. And though the pious cavilled at my mirth, At least I rendered thanks for God's fair earth, Grateful that I, among the murmuring rest, Was not an unappreciative guest. I WOULD not venture to dispraise or praise. Too well I know the indifference which bounds A poet in the narrow working-grounds Where he is blind and deaf in all his ways. He must work out alone his path to glory; A thousand breaths are fanning him along; A thousand tears end in one little song, A thousand conflicts in one little story; A thousand notes swell to a single chord. He cannot tell where his direction tends; He strives unguided towards indefinite ends; He is an ignorant though absolute lord. FROM the shores of the Atlantic to the gardens of From the darkness of the Neva to the courts of There is nothing that can hold us, hold our wandering caravan. Leisurely is our encamping; nowhere pause in hasty flight. Long enough to learn the secret, and the value, and the might, Whether of the northern mountains or the southern lands of light. And the riches of the regions will be ours from land to land, Falling as a wiling booty under our marauding hand, Rugs from Persia, gods from China, emeralds from And the old forgotten empires, which have faded turn by turn, From the shades emerging slowly to their ancient sway return, And to their imperial manhood rise the ashes from the urn. We have known Bzyantium's glory when the eagled flag was flown, When the ruins were not ruins; eagled visions have I known Of a spectral Roman emperor seated on a spectral throne. We have tasted space and freedom, frontiers falling as we went, Now with narrow bonds and limits never could we be content, For we have abolished boundaries, straitened borders have we rent, And a house no more confines us than the roving nomad's tent. We owned a garden on a hill, We planted rose and daffodil, Flowers that English poets sing, And hoped for glory in the Spring. We planted yellow hollyhocks, And humble sweetly-smelling stocks, And columbine for carnival, And dreamt of Summer's festival. And Autumn not to be outdone As heiress of the summer sun, Should doubly wreathe her tawny head With poppies and with creepers red. We waited then for all to grow, We planted wallflowers in a row. And lavendar and borage blue, Alas! we waited, I and you, But love was all that ever grew. I WOKE to daylight, and to find A wreath of fading vine-leaves, rough entwined, Lying, as dropped in hasty flight, upon my floor. Dropped from thy head, sweet Spirit of the night, Who cam'st, with footstep light, Blown in by the soft breeze, as thistledown, In through my open door. Whence? From the woodland, from the fields of corn, From flirting airily with the bright moon, Playing throughout the hours that go too soon, Ready to fly at the approach of morn, Thou cam'st, Bent on the curious quest To see what mortal guest Dwelt in the one-roomed cottage built to face the dawn. Thou didst pause Shy, timid, on the threshold, though there laughed The mischief in thy roguish eyes, then soft, Thou crosst the room on tiptoe to my bed, One finger on thy lip, Cautious to make no slip, I saw the wreath of vine-leaves on thy head. Then with a twirl Thinking I slept, And a joyous whirl, Into a dance leapt The careless spirit too long restrained; The purest dancing, Feet sometimes chancing To touch the ground; Then starting up with a fresh high bound, To hang for a moment poised in the air, And a glimpse of white teeth glancing And a laughing face beneath tossing hair; An orgy, a revel, a living joy, Embodied in one slim woodland boy, Dancing forward, backward, now here, now there, Swaying to every impulse unconstrained. Thou wert too pure for Bacchus, and too young for What wert thou? In the daytime dost thou sleep In a cave Like a grave, Till the moon calls thee, in the sleep of man, To thy light revels through the sombre deep Wood's shadows to a space among the trees, Where the breeze Makes music through the branches for thy dance, And the large-eyed and silent deer stand round Peeping through tree-trunks, and each forest sound The trickling stream's Murmur in its dreams, The shepherd's pipe, far-echoing by chance, Melt all for thee To one soft harmony, While for the lighting of thy mossy slope The moon thy lover sheds an opal glow, Pale silver-green, the colour of the leaves Of olive-trees, The limelight on the stage for Youth and Joy and And at the first rose menace of the dawn Must thou go, Fly to thy cave, thou little pagan Faun? The fount of joy was bubbling in thine eyes, Dancing was in thy feet, And on thy lips a laugh that never dies, Unutterably sweet. Dance on! for ever young, for ever fair, Lightfooted as a frightened bounding deer, Thy wreath of vine-leaves twisted in thy hair, Through all the changing seasons of the year, And tread, to Autumn's gorgeous hymn of praise, And to the happy Spring's light lilt of pleasure, And to the dirgeful chant of Winter's days, And ever varying, ever suited measure; And in the Summer, when the reeking earth Swings a vast censer, as it is most meet, Praise thou for lavish gifts, new hopes, new birth, Praise with the dancing of thy tireless feet! I woke to daylight, and to find A wreath of fading vine-leaves, rough entwined, Lying, as dropped in hasty flight, upon my floor. FOR years it had been neglected, This wilderness garden of ours, And its ruin had shone reflected In its pools through abandoned hours. For none had cared for its beauty Till we came, the strangers, the Giaours, And none had thought of a duty Towards its squandering flowers. Of broken wells and fountains There were half a dozen or more, And, beyond the sea, the mountains Of that far Bithynian shore Were blue in the purple distance And white was the cap they wore, And never in our existence Had life seemed brighter before! And the fruit-trees grew in profusion, Quince and pomegranate and wine, And the roses in rich confusion With the lilac intertwine, And the Banksia rose, the creeper, Which is golden like yellow wine, Is surely more gorgeous and deeper In this garden of mine and thine. And the little bright flowers in the grasses, Cyclamen, daffodil, Are crushed by the foot that passes, But seem to grow thicker still; In the cool grey fig-tree's shadows They grow at their own free will, In the grass as in English meadows, On the slope of an English hill. Is it best, when the lone flute-player Wanders by with his strange little tune And the muezzin sings out for prayer Thrice daily his Arabic rune: Once, when the sunset has faded, Once in the brilliant noon, Or once in the daybreak, rose-shaded. A farewell to the dying moon? I KNOW so well the busy cries That echo through the quarter Till daylight into evening dies And stars shine in the water, So dear they have become to me, Leblebidji! leblebidji! On peaceful English country nights Their rapid gay succession And all the sea-reflected lights Will pass from my possession, But never from my memory, Leblebidji! leblebidji! Past English evening scents and sounds, Past English church-bells ringing, The Turkish watchman on his rounds, The Turkish pedlar singing Through narrow streets above the sea Leblebidji! leblebidji, Will surely pierce a ghostly way, The music underlying, And in the shades of falling day As in the distance dying, A little call will come to me, ABOVE the city at his feet, Above the dome, above the sea, He rises unconfined and free To break upon the noonday heat. He turns around the parapet, Black-robed against the marble tower; His singing gains or loses power In pacing round the minaret. A brother to the singing birds He never knew restraining walls, But freely rises, freely falls The rhythm of the sacred words. I would that it to me were given To climb each day the muezzin's stair And in the warm and silent air To sing my heart out into Heaven. A SUNNY court with wooden balconies, And wool hung out to dry in gaudy skeins, A fountain, and some pigeons murmuringly Picking up yellow grains. Pass through a little tumble-down green door Into the dark and crowded shop; the Turk Crouching above the brasier, smiles and nods; 'Tis all his daily work. Here marble heads and alabaster jars, Fragments of porphyry and Persian tiles, Lie heaped in ruin, and at our dismay The old Turk shrugs and smiles, And sips his coffee, reaching out a hand To throw upon the brasier at his feet A handful of dried herbs, whose sudden smoke Rises up incense-sweet. AS the baying of wolves from afar, Borne on the wind from the Golden Horn A cry in the distance, long-drawn, Yanghin var! yanghin var! Suddenly waking the silent night, Suddenly breaking the sleeping calm, The long, far, wailing alarm, And the watch-tower startles a warning light. As a torch passed from hand to hand, As a beacon springing from hill to hill, The cry draws nearer though distant still, And the watch throws it on from stand to stand, And the voices rise as a tempest far, As the swell of waves on a rocky shore, Each rumbles louder than before, Yanghin var! yanghin var! And as the angel's unpausing feet, The angel bearing the wrath of the Lord, The angel bearing the flaming sword, The voice passes onward below in the street. Faintly it travels again from afar, And as an echo of terror past The wind from the Bosphorus bears the last SHE has an early morning of her own, A blending of the mist and sea and sun Into an undistinguishable one, And Saint Sophia, from her lordly throne Rises above the opalescent cloud, A shadowy dome and soaring minaret Visable though the base be hidden yet Beneath the veiling wreaths of milky shroud, As some dark Turkish beauty haughtily Glances above the yashmak's snowy fold. Beyond Stamboul's long stretch, a bar of gold Falls from the sun across the distant sea. AFTER a dream-dim voyage We came with sails all set Towards the city of the sea, And it was wonderful to me To find her reigning yet. Oh beauty that my eyes and heart Had feasted on before! The evening mosques were brushed with gold, The water lapped a lazy fold Upon that lovely shore; The gardens of her terraced hills Rose up above the port, And little houses half concealed The presence of a light revealed, And here my journey's end was sealed, And I reached the home I sought. Those windows I had opened wide To welcome in the sun! Those stairs that only happy feet Had measured with their running beat! That well-remembered winding street! Twelve months that were as one! Should others with their sordid cares And troubles enter here? Love hung about the rooms like smoke, And peace descended as a cloak, Should I allow the vulgar folk To desecrate that year? I laid the fuse with steady hand; We sailed into the night, From deck I watched the flames arise Remorseless as my tearless eyes That, with the waves and reddened skies, Flung back the angry light. QUEEN of a double empire still she stands, And watches with superb indifferent eyes The eager wooing of Imperial hands Towards so fair and coveted a prize. Royal and imperial suitors has she known Pass one by one across her dreaming years, And some a while have climbed the golden throne, And some have passed away in blood and tears; For many emperors have sought her grace Since the first Constantine in sweeping cloak Her seven hills with broad unhurrying pace Measured, and rested not till Heaven spoke. A haughty fatalist Byzantium waits What chance the storing centuries bring forth: Another lover almost at the gates, Heralded by the cannon of the North, An iron clasp to set the shining gem, Thrice-changed Constantinople to be seen O Saint Sophia, where the footstep falls Softly beneath the roofs of burnished gold, Shields of the Caliphs hang upon thy walls, Brand of bereaved dishonour ages old. His charger raised on Christian corpses high, O ravished bride of Christianity! Here struck Mahomet's hand as he rode by, And seared the lustre of the porphyry, And, interrupted in the sacred feast, Hearing the advent of the conqueror surge, Into the wall miraculous the priest Entered, and waits the summons to emerge. So on that high and ceremonial day When Russian Czar and prince, and Christian lord Throng Saint Sophia in their packed array To see the church's heritage restored, When from mosaics re-established saints Look down once more upon a Christian crowd, And Echo startles into life, and faints With rapture at Gregorian chanting loud, And Mass magnificently moving on Towards its climax, brings the moment near After the lapse of many centuries gone For Christ in priestly hands to reappear, When the exultant organ's chord has ceased And every head is bowed expectantly, Then at the altar the Byzantine priest Shall hold aloft the Host triumphantly! I SEE the work of others, and my heart Sinks as my own achievement I compare. I will not be irresolute, nor despair, But battle strongly for my struggling art Convinced against conviction that my part Equally with my masters I can bear; Although their monuments are very fair, Enriched with statues, and I stand apart And gaze upon my little heap of stones Which I was given to build with, very few As yet laid into place, but I will lay Blind to these marble monuments and thrones, Building as though I confidently knew My ultimate end, a stone in place each day. <|endofpoem|> This is the month, and this the happy morn, Wherein the Son of Heaven's eternal King, Of wedded maid and virgin mother born, Our great redemption from above did bring; For so the holy sages once did sing, That he our deadly forfeit should release, And with his Father work us a perpetual peace. That glorious form, that light unsufferable, And that far-beaming blaze of majesty, Wherewith he wont at Heaven's high council-table To sit the midst of Trinal Unity, He laid aside, and, here with us to be, Forsook the courts of everlasting day, And chose with us a darksome house of mortal clay. Say, Heavenly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein Afford a present to the Infant God? Hast thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strain, To welcome him to this his new abode, Now while the heaven, by the Sun's team untrod, Hath took no print of the approaching light, And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright? See how from far upon the eastern road The star-led wizards haste with odors sweet! Oh! run; prevent them with thy humble ode, And lay it lowly at his blessed feet; Have thou the honor first thy Lord to greet, And join thy voice unto the Angel Quire, From out his secret altar touched with hallowed fire. It was the winter wild, While the heaven-born child All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies; Nature, in awe to him, Had doffed her gaudy trim, With her great Master so to sympathize: It was no season then for her To wanton with the Sun, her lusty paramour. Only with speeches fair She woos the gentle air To hide her guilty front with innocent snow, And on her naked shame, Pollute with sinful blame, The saintly veil of maiden white to throw; Confounded, that her Maker's eyes Should look so near upon her foul deformities. But he, her fears to cease, Sent down the meek-eyed Peace: She, crowned with olive green, came softly sliding Down through the turning sphere, His ready harbinger, With turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing; And, waving wide her myrtle wand, She strikes a universal peace through sea and land. No war, or battle's sound, Was heard the world around; The idle spear and shield were high uphung; The hooked chariot stood, Unstained with hostile blood; The trumpet spake not to the armed throng; And kings sat still with awful eye, As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by. But peaceful was the night His reign of peace upon the earth began. The winds, with wonder whist, Smoothly the waters kissed, Whispering new joys to the mild Ocean, Who now hath quite forgot to rave, While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave. The stars, with deep amaze, Stand fixed in steadfast gaze, Bending one way their precious influence, And will not take their flight, For all the morning light, Or Lucifer that often warned them thence; But in their glimmering orbs did glow, Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go. And, though the shady gloom Had given day her room, The Sun himself withheld his wonted speed, And hid his head for shame, As his inferior flame The new-enlightened world no more should need: He saw a greater Sun appear Than his bright throne or burning axletree could bear. The shepherds on the lawn, Or ere the point of dawn, Sat simply chatting in a rustic row; Full little thought they than That the mighty Pan Was kindly come to live with them below: Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep, Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep. When such music sweet Their hearts and ears did greet As never was by mortal finger strook, Divinely-warbled voice Answering the stringed noise, As all their souls in blissful rapture took: The air, such pleasure loth to lose, With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close. Nature, that heard such sound Beneath the hollow round Of Cynthia's seat the Airy region thrilling, Now was almost won To think her part was done, And that her reign had here its last fulfilling: She knew such harmony alone Could hold all Heaven and Earth in happier union. At last surrounds their sight A globe of circular light, That with long beams the shamefaced Night arrayed; The helmed cherubim And sworded seraphim Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displayed, Harping in loud and solemn quire, With unexpressive notes, to Heaven's new-born Heir. Such music as 'tis said Before was never made, But when of old the Sons of Morning sung, While the Creator great His constellations set, And the well-balanced World on hinges hung, And cast the dark foundations deep, And bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep. Ring out, ye crystal spheres! Once bless our human ears, If ye have power to touch our senses so; And let your silver chime Move in melodious time; And let the bass of heaven's deep organ blow; And with your ninefold harmony Make up full consort to the angelic symphony. For, if such holy song Enwrap our fancy long, Time will run back and fetch the Age of Gold; And speckled Vanity Will sicken soon and die, And leprous Sin will melt from earthly mould; And Hell itself will pass away, And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day. Yea, Truth and Justice then Will down return to men, Orbed in a rainbow; and, like glories wearing, Mercy will sit between, Throned in celestial sheen, With radiant feet the tissued clouds down steering; And Heaven, as at some festival, Will open wide the gates of her high palace-hall. But wisest Fate says No, This must not yet be so; The Babe yet lies in smiling infancy That on the bitter cross Must redeem our loss, So both himself and us to glorify: Yet first, to those ychained in sleep, The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep. With such a horrid clang As on Mount Sinai rang, While the red fire and smouldering clouds outbrake: The aged Earth, aghast With terror of that blast, Shall from the surface to the centre shake, When, at the world's last session, The dreadful Judge in middle air shall spread his throne. And then at last our bliss Full and perfect is, But now begins; for from this happy day The Old Dragon under ground, In straiter limits bound, Not half so far casts his usurped sway, And, wroth to see his kingdom fail, Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail. No voice or hideous hum Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving. Apollo from his shrine Can no more divine, With hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving. No nightly trance, or breathed spell, Inspires the pale-eyed priest from the prophetic cell. The lonely mountains o'er, And the resounding shore, A voice of weeping heard and loud lament; From haunted spring, and dale Edged with poplar pale, The parting Genius is with sighing sent; With flower-inwoven tresses torn The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn. In consecrated earth, And on the holy hearth, The Lars and Lemures moan with midnight plaint; In urns, and altars round, A drear and dying sound Affrights the flamens at their service quaint; And the chill marble seems to sweat, While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat. Forsake their temples dim, With that twice-battered god of Palestine; And mooned Ashtaroth, Heaven's queen and mother both, Now sits not girt with tapers' holy shine: The Lybic Hammon shrinks his horn; In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn. And sullen Moloch, fled, Hath left in shadows dread His burning idol all of blackest hue; In vain with cymbals' ring They call the grisly king, In dismal dance about the furnace blue; The brutish gods of Nile as fast, Isis, and Orus, and the dog Anubis, haste. Nor is Osiris seen In Memphian grove or green, Trampling the unshowered grass with lowings loud; Nor can he be at rest Within his sacred chest; Nought but profoundest Hell can be his shroud; In vain, with timbrelled anthems dark, The sable-stoled sorcerers bear his worshipped ark. He feels from Juda's land The dreaded Infant's hand; The rays of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn; Nor all the gods beside Longer dare abide, Not Typhon huge ending in snaky twine: Our Babe, to show his Godhead true, Can in his swaddling bands control the damned crew. So, when the sun in bed, Curtained with cloudy red, Pillows his chin upon an orient wave, The flocking shadows pale Troop to the infernal jail, Each fettered ghost slips to his several grave, And the yellow-skirted fays Fly after the night-steeds, leaving their moon-loved maze. But see! the Virgin blest Hath laid her Babe to rest. Time is our tedious song should here have ending: Heaven's youngest-teemed star Hath fixed her polished car, Her sleeping Lord with handmaid lamp attending; And all about the courtly stable Bright-harnessed Angels sit in order serviceable. What needs my Shakespeare for his honored bones The labor of an age in piled stones? Or that his hallowed reliques should be hid Under a star-ypointing pyramid? Dear son of memory, great heir of fame, What need'st thou such weak witness of thy name? Thou in our wonder and astonishment Hast built thyself a livelong monument. For whilst, to the shame of slow-endeavoring art Thy easy numbers flow, and that each heart Hath from the leaves of thy unvalued book Those Delphic lines with deep impression took, Then thou, our fancy of itself bereaving, Dost make us marble with too much conceiving, And so sepulchred in such pomp dost lie That kings for such a tomb would wish to die. Hence, loathed Melancholy, Of Cerberus and blackest Midnight born In Stygian cave forlorn 'Mongst horrid shapes, and shrieks, and sights unholy! Find out some uncouth cell, Where brooding Darkness spreads his jealous wings, And the night-raven sings; There, under ebon shades and low-browed rocks, As ragged as thy locks, In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell. But come, thou Goddess fair and free, In heaven yclept Euphrosyne, And by men heart-easing Mirth; Whom lovely Venus, at a birth, With two sister Graces more, To ivy-crowned Bacchus bore: Or whether as some sager sing The frolic wind that breathes the spring, Zephyr, with Aurora playing, As he met her once a-Maying, There, on beds of violets blue, And fresh-blown roses washed in dew, Filled her with thee, a daughter fair, So buxom, blithe, and debonair. Haste thee, Nymph, and bring with thee Jest, and youthful Jollity, Quips and Cranks and wanton Wiles, Nods and Becks and wreathed Smiles, Such as hang on Hebe's cheek, And love to live in dimple sleek; Sport that wrinkled Care derides, And Laughter holding both his sides. Come, and trip it, as you go, On the light fantastic toe; And in thy right hand lead with thee The mountain-nymph, sweet Liberty; And, if I give thee honor due, Mirth, admit me of thy crew, To live with her, and live with thee, In unreproved pleasures free; To hear the lark begin his flight, And, singing, startle the dull night, From his watch-tower in the skies, Till the dappled dawn doth rise; Then to come, in spite of sorrow, And at my window bid good-morrow, Through the sweet-briar or the vine, Or the twisted eglantine; While the cock, with lively din, Scatters the rear of darkness thin; And to the stack, or the barn-door, Stoutly struts his dames before: Oft listening how the hounds and horn Cheerly rouse the slumbering morn, From the side of some hoar hill, Through the high wood echoing shrill: Sometime walking, not unseen, By hedgerow elms, on hillocks green, Right against the eastern gate Where the great Sun begins his state, Robed in flames and amber light, The clouds in thousand liveries dight; While the ploughman, near at hand, Whistles o'er the furrowed land, And the milkmaid singeth blithe, And the mower whets his scythe, And every shepherd tells his tale Under the hawthorn in the dale. Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures, Whilst the landskip round it measures: Russet lawns, and fallows gray, Where the nibbling flocks do stray; Mountains on whose barren breast The laboring clouds do often rest; Meadows trim, with daisies pied; Shallow brooks, and rivers wide; Towers and battlements it sees Bosomed high in tufted trees, Where perhaps some beauty lies, The cynosure of neighboring eyes. Hard by a cottage chimney smokes From betwixt two aged oaks, Are at their savory dinner set Of herbs and other country messes, Which the neat-handed Phyllis dresses; And then in haste her bower she leaves, With Thestylis to bind the sheaves; Or, if the earlier season lead, To the tanned haycock in the mead. Sometimes, with secure delight, The upland hamlets will invite, When the merry bells ring round, And the jocund rebecks sound To many a youth and many a maid Dancing in the chequered shade, And young and old come forth to play On a sunshine holiday, Till the livelong daylight fail: Then to the spicy nut-brown ale, With stories told of many a feat, How Faery Mab the junkets eat. She was pinched and pulled, she said; And he, by Friar's lantern led, Tells how the drudging goblin sweat To earn his cream-bowl duly set, When in one night, ere glimpse of morn, His shadowy flail hath threshed the corn That ten day-laborers could not end; Then lies him down, the lubber fiend, And, stretched out all the chimney's length, Basks at the fire his hairy strength, And crop-full out of doors he flings, Ere the first cock his matin rings. Thus done the tales, to bed they creep, By whispering winds soon lulled asleep. Towered cities please us then, And the busy hum of men, Where throngs of knights and barons bold, In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold, With store of ladies, whose bright eyes Rain influence, and judge the prize Of wit or arms, while both contend To win her grace whom all commend. There let Hymen oft appear In saffron robe, with taper clear, And pomp, and feast, and revelry, With mask and antique pageantry; Such sights as youthful poets dream, On summer eves by haunted stream. Then to the well-trod stage anon, If Jonson's learned sock be on, Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy's child, Warble his native wood-notes wild, And ever, against eating cares, Lap me in soft Lydian airs, Married to immortal verse, Such as the meeting soul may pierce, In notes with many a winding bout Of linked sweetness long drawn out With wanton heed and giddy cunning, The melting voice through mazes running, Untwisting all the chains that tie The hidden soul of harmony; That Orpheus' self may heave his head From golden slumber on a bed Of heaped Elysian flowers, and hear Such strains as would have won the ear Of Pluto to have quite set free His half-regained Eurydice. These delights if thou canst give, Mirth, with thee I mean to live. Hence, vain deluding Joys, The brood of Folly without father bred! How little you bested, Or fill the fixed mind with all your toys! Dwell in some idle brain, And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess, As thick and numberless As the gay motes that people the sun-beams, Or likest hovering dreams, The fickle pensioners of Morpheus' train. But, hail! thou Goddess sage and holy! Hail, divinest Melancholy! Whose saintly visage is too bright To hit the sense of human sight, And therefore to our weaker view, O'erlaid with black, staid Wisdom's hue; Black, but such as in esteem Prince Memnon's sister might beseem, Or that starred Ethiop queen that strove To set her beauty's praise above The Sea-Nymphs, and their powers offended. Yet thou art higher far descended: Thee bright-haired Vesta long of yore To solitary Saturn bore; His daughter she; in Saturn's reign Such mixture was not held a stain. Oft in glimmering bowers and glades He met her, and in secret shades Of woody Ida's inmost grove, Whilst yet there was no fear of Jove. Come, pensive Nun, devout and pure, Sober, steadfast, and demure, All in a robe of darkest grain, Flowing with majestic train, And sable stole of cypress lawn Over thy decent shoulders drawn. Come; but keep thy wonted state, With even step, and musing gait, And looks commercing with the skies Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes: There, held in holy passion still, Forget thyself to marble, till With a sad leaden downward cast Thou fix them on the earth as fast. And join with thee calm Peace and Quiet, Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet, And hears the Muses in a ring Aye round about Jove's altar sing; And add to these retired Leisure, That in trim gardens takes his pleasure; But, first and chiefest, with thee bring Him that yon soars on golden wing, Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne, And the mute Silence hist along, 'Less Philomel will deign a song, In her sweetest, saddest plight, Smoothing the rugged brow of Night, While Cynthia checks her dragon yoke Gently o'er the accustomed oak. Sweet bird, that shunn'st the noise of folly, Most musical, most melancholy! Thee, chauntress, oft the woods among I woo, to hear thy even-song; And, missing thee, I walk unseen On the dry smooth-shaven green, To behold the wandering moon, Riding near her highest noon, Like one that had been led astray Through the heaven's wide pathless way, And oft, as if her head she bowed, Stooping through a fleecy cloud. Oft, on a plat of rising ground, I hear the far-off curfew sound, Over some wide-watered shore, Swinging slow with sullen roar; Or, if the air will not permit, Some still removed place will fit, Where glowing embers through the room Teach light to counterfeit a gloom, Far from all resort of mirth, Save the cricket on the hearth, Or the bellman's drowsy charm To bless the doors from nightly harm. Or let my lamp, at midnight hour, Be seen in some high lonely tower, With thrice great Hermes, or unsphere The spirit of Plato, to unfold What worlds or what vast regions hold The immortal mind that hath forsook Her mansion in this fleshly nook; And of those demons that are found In fire, air, flood, or underground, Whose power hath a true consent With planet or with element. Sometime let gorgeous Tragedy In sceptred pall come sweeping by, Presenting Thebes, or Pelops' line, Or the tale of Troy divine, Or what though rare of later age Ennobled hath the buskined stage. But, O sad Virgin! that thy power Might raise Musaeus from his bower; Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing Such notes as, warbled to the string, Drew iron tears down Pluto's cheek, And made Hell grant what love did seek; Or call up him that left half-told The story of Cambuscan bold, And who had Canace to wife, That owned the virtuous ring and glass, And of the wondrous horse of brass On which the Tartar king did ride; And if aught else great bards beside In sage and solemn tunes have sung, Of turneys, and of trophies hung, Of forests, and enchantments drear, Where more is meant than meets the ear. Thus, Night, oft see me in thy pale career, Till civil-suited Morn appear, Not tricked and frounced, as she was wont With the Attic boy to hunt, But kerchieft in a comely cloud, While rocking winds are piping loud Or ushered with a shower still, When the gust hath blown his fill, Ending on the rustling leaves, With minute-drops from off the eaves. And, when the sun begins to fling His flaring beams, me, Goddess, bring To arched walks of twilight groves, And shadows brown, that Sylvan loves, Of pine, or monumental oak, Where the rude axe with heaved stroke Was never heard the nymphs to daunt, Or fright them from their hallowed haunt. There, in close covert, by some brook, Where no profaner eye may look, Hide me from day's garish eye, While the bee with honeyed thigh, That at her flowery work doth sing, And the waters murmuring, With such consort as they keep, Entice the dewy-feathered Sleep. And let some strange mysterious dream Wave at his wings, in airy stream Of lively portraiture displayed, Softly on my eyelids laid; And, as I wake, sweet music breathe Above, about, or underneath, Sent by some Spirit to mortals good, Or the unseen Genius of the wood. But let my due feet never fail To walk the studious cloister's pale, And love the high embowed roof, With antique pillars massy-proof, And storied windows richly dight, Casting a dim religious light. There let the pealing organ blow, To the full-voiced quire below, In service high and anthems clear, As may with sweetness, through mine ear, Dissolve me into ecstasies, And bring all Heaven before mine eyes. And may at last my weary age Find out the peaceful hermitage, The hairy gown and mossy cell, Where I may sit and rightly spell Of every star that heaven doth shew, And every herb that sips the dew, Till old experience do attain To something like prophetic strain. These pleasures, Melancholy, give; And I with thee will choose to live. Look, Nymphs and Shepherds, look! What sudden blaze of majesty Is that which we from hence descry, Too divine to be mistook? This, this is she To whom our vows and wishes bend: Here our solemn search hath end. Fame, that her high worth to raise Seemed erst so lavish and profuse, We may justly now accuse Of detraction from her praise: Less than half we find expressed; Envy bid conceal the rest. Mark what radiant state she spreads, In circle round her shining throne Shooting her beams like silver threads: This, this is she alone, Sitting like a goddess bright In the centre of her light. Might she the wise Latona be, Or the towered Cybele, Mother of a hundred gods? Juno dares not give her odds: Who had thought this clime had held A deity so unparalleled? As they come forward, the Genius of the Wood appears, and, turning toward them, speaks. Stay, gentle Swains, for, though in this disguise, I see bright honor sparkle through your eyes; Of famous Arcady ye are, and sprung Of that renowned flood, so often sung, Divine Alpheus, who, by secret sluice, Stole under seas to meet his Arethuse; And ye, the breathing roses of the wood, Fair silver-buskined Nymphs, as great and good. I know this quest of yours and free intent Was all in honor and devotion meant To the great mistress of yon princely shrine, Whom with low reverence I adore as mine, And with all helpful service will comply To further this night's glad solemnity, And lead ye where ye may more near behold What shallow-searching Fame hath left untold; Which I full oft, amidst those shades alone, Have sat to wonder at, and gaze upon. For know, by lot from Jove, I am the Power Of this fair wood, and live in oaken bower, To nurse the saplings tall, and curl the grove With ringlets quaint and wanton windings wove; And all my plants I save from nightly ill Of noisome winds and blasting vapors chill; And from the boughs brush off the evil dew, And heal the harms of thwarting thunder blue, Or what the cross dire-looking planet smites, Or hurtful worm with cankered venom bites. When evening gray doth rise, I fetch my round Over the mount, and all this hallowed ground; And early, ere the odorous breath of morn Awakes the slumbering leaves, or tasselled horn Shakes the high thicket, haste I all about, Number my ranks, and visit every sprout With puissant words and murmurs made to bless. But else, in deep of night, when drowsiness Hath locked up mortal sense, then listen I To the celestial Sirens' harmony, That sit upon the nine infolded spheres, And sing to those that hold the vital shears, And turn the adamantine spindle round On which the fate of gods and men is wound. Such sweet compulsion doth in music lie, To lull the daughters of Necessity, And keep unsteady Nature to her law, And the low world in measured motion draw After the heavenly tune, which none can hear Of human mould with gross unpurged ear. And yet such music worthiest were to blaze The peerless height of her immortal praise Whose lustre leads us, and for her most fit, If my inferior hand or voice could hit Inimitable sounds. Yet, as we go, Whate'er the skill of lesser gods can show I will assay, her worth to celebrate, And so attend ye toward her glittering state; Where ye may all, that are of noble stem, Approach, and kiss her sacred vesture's hem. O'er the smooth enamelled green, Where no print of step hath been, Follow me, as I sing And touch the warbled string: Under the shady roof Of branching elm star-proof I will bring you where she sits, Clad in splendor as befits Her deity. Such a rural Queen All Arcadia hath not seen. Nymphs and Shepherds, dance no more By sandy Ladon's lilied banks; On old Lycaeus, or Cyllene hoar, Trip no more in twilight ranks; Though Erymanth your loss deplore, A better soil shall give ye thanks. From the stony Maenalus Bring your flocks, and live with us; Here ye shall have greater grace, To serve the Lady of this place. Though Syrinx your Pan's mistress were, Yet Syrinx well might wait on her. Such a rural Queen All Arcadia hath not seen. Blest pair of Sirens, pledges of Heaven's joy, Sphere-born harmonious sisters, Voice and Verse, Wed your divine sounds, and mixed power employ, Dead things with inbreathed sense able to pierce; And to our high-raised phantasy present That undisturbed song of pure concent, Aye sung before the sapphire-colored throne To Him that sits thereon, With saintly shout and solemn jubilee; Where the bright Seraphim in burning row Their loud uplifted angel-trumpets blow, And the Cherubic host in thousand quires Touch their immortal harps of golden wires, With those just Spirits that wear victorious palms, Hymns devout and holy psalms Singing everlastingly: That we on Earth, with undiscording voice, May rightly answer that melodious noise; As once we did, till disproportioned sin Jarred against nature's chime, and with harsh din Broke the fair music that all creatures made To their great Lord, whose love their motion swayed In perfect diapason, whilst they stood In first obedience, and their state of good. O, may we soon again renew that song, And keep in tune with Heaven, till God ere long To his celestial consort us unite, To live with Him, and sing in endless morn of light! The Attendant Spirit, afterwards in the habit of Thyrsis. Comus, with his Crew. The first Scene discovers a wild wood. The Attendant Spirit descends or enters. Before the starry threshold of Jove's court My mansion is, where those immortal shapes Of bright aerial spirits live insphered In regions mild of calm and serene air, Above the smoke and stir of this dim spot Which men call Earth, and, with low-thoughted care, Confined and pestered in this pinfold here, Strive to keep up a frail and feverish being, Unmindful of the crown that Virtue gives, After this mortal change, to her true servants Amongst the enthroned gods on sainted seats. Yet some there be that by due steps aspire To lay their just hands on that golden key That opes the palace of eternity. To such my errand is; and, but for such, I would not soil these pure ambrosial weeds With the rank vapors of this sin-worn mould. But to my task. Neptune, besides the sway Of every salt flood and each ebbing stream Took in, by lot 'twixt high and nether Jove. Imperial rule of all the sea-girt isles That, like to rich and various gems, inlay The unadorned bosom of the deep; Which he, to grace his tributary gods, By course commits to several government, And gives them leave to wear their sapphire crowns And wield their little tridents. But this Isle, The greatest and the best of all the main, He quarters to his blue-haired deities; And all this tract that fronts the falling sun A noble Peer of mickle trust and power Has in his charge, with tempered awe to guide An old and haughty nation, proud in arms: Where his fair offspring, nursed in princely lore, Are coming to attend their father's state, And new-intrusted sceptre. But their way Lies through the perplexed paths of this drear wood, The nodding horror of those shady brows Threats the forlorn and wandering passenger; And here their tender age might suffer peril, But that, by quick command from sovran Jove, I was despatched for their defence and guard! And listen why; for I will tell you now What never yet was heard in tale or song, From old or modern bard, in hall or bower. Bacchus, that first from out the purple grape Crushed the sweet poison of misused wine, After the Tuscan mariners transformed, Coasting the Tyrrhene shore, as the winds listed, On Circe's island fell. Who knows not Circe, The daughter of the Sun, whose charmed cup Whoever tasted lost his upright shape, And downward fell into a grovelling swine? This Nymph, that gazed upon his clustering locks, With ivy berries wreathed, and his blithe youth, Had by him, ere he parted thence, a son Much like his father, but his mother more, Whom therefore she brought up, and Comus named: Who, ripe and frolic of his full-grown age, Roving the Celtic and Iberian fields, At last betakes him to this ominous wood, And, in thick shelter of black shades imbowered, Excels his mother at her mighty art; Offering to every weary traveller His orient liquor in a crystal glass, To quench the drouth of Phoebus; which as they taste For most do taste through fond intemperate thirst , Soon as the potion works, their human count'nance, The express resemblance of the gods, is changed Into some brutish form of wolf or bear, Or ounce or tiger, hog, or bearded goat, All other parts remaining as they were. And they, so perfect in their misery, Not once perceive their foul disfigurement, But boast themselves more comely than before, And all their friends and native home forget, To roll with pleasure in a sensual sty. Therefore, when any favored of high Jove Chances to pass through this adventurous glade, Swift as the sparkle of a glancing star I shoot from heaven, to give him safe convoy, As now I do. But first I must put off These my sky-robes, spun out of Iris' woof, And take the weeds and likeness of a swain That to the service of this house belongs, Who, with his soft pipe and smooth-dittied song, Well knows to still the wild winds when they roar, And hush the waving woods; nor of less faith, And in this office of his mountain watch Likeliest, and nearest to the present aid Of this occasion. But I hear the tread Of hateful steps; I must be viewless now. The star that bids the shepherd fold Now the top of heaven doth hold; And the gilded car of day His glowing axle doth allay In the steep Atlantic stream: And the slope sun his upward beam Shoots against the dusky pole, Pacing toward the other goal Of his chamber in the east. Meanwhile, welcome joy and feast, Midnight shout and revelry, Tipsy dance and jollity. Braid your locks with rosy twine, Dropping odors, dropping wine. Rigor now is gone to bed; And Advice with scrupulous head, Strict Age, and sour Severity, With their grave saws, in slumber lie. We, that are of purer fire, Imitate the starry quire, Who, in their nightly watchful spheres, Lead in swift round the months and years. The sounds and seas, with all their finny drove, Now to the moon in wavering morrice move; And on the tawny sands and shelves Trip the pert fairies and the dapper elves. By dimpled brook and fountain-brim, The wood-nymphs, decked with daisies trim, Their merry wakes and pastimes keep: What hath night to do with sleep? Night hath better sweets to prove; Venus now wakes, and wakens Love. Come, let us our rites begin; 'Tis only daylight that makes sin, Which these dun shades will ne'er report. Hail, goddess of nocturnal sport, Dark-veiled Cotytto, to whom the secret flame Of midnight torches burns! mysterious dame, That ne'er art called but when the dragon womb Of Stygian darkness spets her thickest gloom, And makes one blot of all the air! Stay thy cloudy ebon chair, Wherein thou ridest with Hecat', and befriend Us thy vowed priests, till utmost end Of all thy dues be done, and none left out Ere the blabbing eastern scout, The nice Morn on the Indian steep, From her cabined loop-hole peep, And to the tell-tale Sun descry Our concealed solemnity. Come, knit hands, and beat the ground In a light fantastic round. Break off, break off! I feel the different pace Of some chaste footing near about this ground. Run to your shrouds within these brakes and trees; Our number may affright. Some virgin sure For so I can distinguish by mine art Benighted in these woods! Now to my charms, And to my wily trains: I shall ere long Be well stocked with as fair a herd as grazed About my mother Circe. Thus I hurl My dazzling spells into the spongy air, Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion, And give it false presentments, lest the place And my quaint habits breed astonishment, And put the damsel to suspicious flight; Which must not be, for that's against my course. I, under fair pretence of friendly ends, And well-placed words of glozing courtesy, Baited with reasons not unplausible, Wind me into the easy-hearted man, And hug him into snares. When once her eye Hath met the virtue of this magic dust I shall appear some harmless villager, Whom thrift keeps up about his country gear. But here she comes; I fairly step aside, And hearken, if I may her business hear. The Lady enters. This way the noise was, if mine ear be true, My best guide now. Methought it was the sound Of riot and ill-managed merriment, Such as the jocund flute or gamesome pipe Stirs up among the loose unlettered hinds, When, for their teeming flocks and granges full, In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan, And thank the gods amiss. I should be loth To meet the rudeness and swilled insolence Of such late wassailers; yet, oh! where else Shall I inform my unacquainted feet In the blind mazes of this tangled wood? My brothers, when they saw me wearied out With this long way, resolving here to lodge Under the spreading favor of these pines, Stepped, as they said, to the next thicket-side To bring me berries, or such cooling fruit As the kind hospitable woods provide. They left me then when the gray-hooded Even, Like a sad votarist in palmer's weed, Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus' wain. But where they are, and why they came not back, Is now the labor of my thoughts. 'Tis likeliest They had engaged their wandering steps too far; And envious darkness, ere they could return, Had stole them from me. Else, O thievish Night, Why shouldst thou, but for some felonious end, In thy dark lantern thus close up the stars That Nature hung in heaven, and filled their lamps With everlasting oil, to give due light To the misled and lonely traveller? This is the place, as well as I may guess, Whence even now the tumult of loud mirth Was rife, and perfect in my listening ear; Yet nought but single darkness do I find. What might this be? A thousand fantasies Begin to throng into my memory, Of calling shapes, and beckoning shadows dire, And airy tongues that syllable men's names On sands and shores and desert wildernesses. These thoughts may startle well, but not astound The virtuous mind, that ever walks attended By a strong siding champion, Conscience. O, welcome, pure-eyed Faith, white-handed Hope, Thou hovering angel girt with golden wings, And thou unblemished form of Chastity! I see thee visibly, and now believe That He, the Supreme Good, to whom all things ill Are but as slavish officers of vengeance, Would send a glistering guardian, if need were, To keep my life and honor unassailed.... Was I deceived, or did a sable cloud Turn forth her silver lining on the night? I did not err: there does a sable cloud Turn forth her silver lining on the night, And casts a gleam over this tufted grove. I cannot hallo to my brothers, but Such noise as I can make to be heard farthest I'll venture; for my new-enlivened spirits Prompt me, and they perhaps are not far off. Sweet Echo, sweetest nymph, that liv'st unseen Within thy airy shell By slow Meander's margent green, And in the violet-embroidered vale Where the love-lorn nightingale Nightly to thee her sad song mourneth well: Canst thou not tell me of a gentle pair That likest thy Narcissus are? O, if thou have Hid them in some flowery cave, Tell me but where, So may'st thou be translated to the skies, And give resounding grace to all Heaven's harmonies! Can any mortal mixture of earth's mould Breathe such divine enchanting ravishment? Sure something holy lodges in that breast, And with these raptures moves the vocal air To testify his hidden residence. How sweetly did they float upon the wings Of silence, through the empty-vaulted night, At every fall smoothing the raven down Of darkness till it smiled! I have oft heard My mother Circe with the Sirens three, Amidst the flowery-kirtled Naiades, Culling their potent herbs and baleful drugs, Who, as they sung, would take the prisoned soul, And lap it in Elysium: Scylla wept, And chid her barking waves into attention, And fell Charybdis murmured soft applause. Yet they in pleasing slumber lulled the sense, And in sweet madness robbed it of itself; But such a sacred and home-felt delight, Such sober certainty of waking bliss, I never heard till now. I'll speak to her, And she shall be my queen. Hail, foreign wonder! Whom certain these rough shades did never breed, Unless the goddess that in rural shrine Dwell'st here with Pan or Sylvan, by blest song Forbidding every bleak unkindly fog To touch the prosperous growth of this tall wood. Nay, gentle shepherd, ill is lost that praise That is addressed to unattending ears. Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift How to regain my severed company, Compelled me to awake the courteous Echo To give me answer from her mossy couch. What chance, good Lady, hath bereft you thus? Dim darkness and this leavy labyrinth. Could that divide you from near-ushering guides? They left me weary on a grassy turf. By falsehood, or discourtesy, or why? To seek i' the valley some cool friendly spring. And left your fair side all unguarded, Lady? They were but twain, and purposed quick return. Perhaps forestalling night prevented them. How easy my misfortune is to hit! Imports their loss, beside the present need? No less than if I should my brothers lose. Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom? As smooth as Hebe's their unrazored lips. Two such I saw, what time the labored ox In his loose traces from the furrow came, And the swinked hedger at his supper sat. I saw them under a green mantling vine, That crawls along the side of yon small hill, Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots; Their port was more than human, as they stood. I took it for a faery vision Of some gay creatures of the element, That in the colors of the rainbow live, And play i' the plighted clouds. I was awe-strook, And, as I passed, I worshiped. If those you seek, It were a journey like the path to Heaven To help you find them. Gentle villager, What readiest way would bring me to that place? Due west it rises from this shrubby point. To find out that, good shepherd, I suppose, In such a scant allowance of star-light, Would overtask the best land-pilot's art, Without the sure guess of well-practised feet. I know each lane, and every alley green, Dingle, or bushy dell, of this wild wood, And every bosky bourn from side to side, My daily walks and ancient neighborhood; And, if your stray attendance be yet lodged, Or shroud within these limits, I shall know Ere morrow wake, or the low-roosted lark From her thatched pallet rouse. If otherwise, I can conduct you, Lady, to a low But loyal cottage, where you may be safe Till further quest. Shepherd, I take thy word, And trust thy honest-offered courtesy, Which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds, With smoky rafters, than in tapestry halls And courts of princes, where it first was named, And yet is most pretended. In a place Less warranted than this, or less secure, I cannot be, that I should fear to change it. Eye me, blest Providence, and square my trial To my proportioned strength! Shepherd, lead on.... Unmuffle, ye faint stars; and thou, fair moon, That wont'st to love the traveller's benison, Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud, And disinherit Chaos, that reigns here In double night of darkness and of shades; Or, if your influence be quite dammed up With black usurping mists, some gentle taper, Though a rush-candle from the wicker hole Of some clay habitation, visit us With thy long levelled rule of streaming light, And thou shalt be our star of Arcady, Or, if our eyes Be barred that happiness, might we but hear The folded flocks, penned in their wattled cotes, Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops, Or whistle from the lodge, or village cock Count the night-watches to his feathery dames, 'Twould be some solace yet, some little cheering, In this close dungeon of innumerous boughs. But, Oh, that hapless virgin, our lost sister! Where may she wander now, whither betake her From the chill dew, amongst rude burs and thistles? Perhaps some cold bank is her bolster now, Or 'gainst the rugged bark of some broad elm Leans her unpillowed head, fraught with sad fears. What if in wild amazement and affright, Or, while we speak, within the direful grasp Of savage hunger, or of savage heat! Peace, brother: be not over-exquisite To cast the fashion of uncertain evils; For, grant they be so, while they rest unknown, What need a man forestall his date of grief, And run to meet what he would most avoid? Or, if they be but false alarms of fear, How bitter is such self-delusion! I do not think my sister so to seek, Or so unprincipled in virtue's book, And the sweet peace that goodness bosoms ever, As that the single want of light and noise Not being in danger, as I trust she is not Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts, And put them into misbecoming plight. Virtue could see to do what Virtue would By her own radiant light, though sun and moon Were in the flat sea sunk. And Wisdom's self Oft seeks to sweet retired solitude, Where, with her best nurse, Contemplation, She plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings, That, in the various bustle of resort, Were all to-ruffled, and sometimes impaired. He that has light within his own clear breast May sit i' the centre, and enjoy bright day: But he that hides a dark soul and foul thoughts Benighted walks under the mid-day sun; Himself is his own dungeon. 'Tis most true That musing Meditation most affects The pensive secrecy of desert cell, Far from the cheerful haunt of men and herds, And sits as safe as in a senate-house; For who would rob a hermit of his weeds, His few books, or his beads, or maple dish, Or do his gray hairs any violence? But Beauty, like the fair Hesperian tree Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard Of dragon-watch with unenchanted eye To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit, From the rash hand of bold Incontinence. You may as well spread out the unsunned heaps Of miser's treasure by an outlaw's den, And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope Danger will wink on Opportunity, And let a single helpless maiden pass Uninjured in this wild surrounding waste. Of night or loneliness it recks me not; I fear the dread events that dog them both, Lest some ill-greeting touch attempt the person Of our unowned sister. I do not, brother, Infer as if I thought my sister's state Secure without all doubt or controversy; Yet, where an equal poise of hope and fear Does arbitrate the event, my nature is That I incline to hope rather than fear, And gladly banish squint suspicion. My sister is not so defenceless left As you imagine; she has a hidden strength, Which you remember not. What hidden strength, Unless the strength of Heaven, if you mean that? I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength, Which, if Heaven gave it, may be termed her own. 'Tis chastity, my brother, chastity: She that has that is clad in complete steel, And, like a quivered nymph with arrows keen, May trace huge forests, and unharbored heaths, Infamous hills, and sandy perilous wilds; Where, through the sacred rays of chastity, No savage fierce, bandite, or mountaineer, Will dare to soil her virgin purity. Yea, there where very desolation dwells, By grots and caverns shagged with horrid shades, She may pass on with unblenched majesty, Be it not done in pride, or in presumption. Some say no evil thing that walks by night, In fog or fire, by lake or moorish fen, Blue meagre hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost, That breaks his magic chains at curfew time, No goblin or swart faery of the mine, Hath hurtful power o'er true virginity. Do ye believe me yet, or shall I call Antiquity from the old schools of Greece To testify the arms of chastity? Hence had the huntress Dian her dread bow, Fair silver-shafted queen forever chaste, Wherewith she tamed the brinded lioness And spotted mountain-pard, but set at nought The frivolous bolt of Cupid; gods and men Feared her stern frown, and she was queen o' the woods. What was that snaky-headed Gorgon shield That wise Minerva wore, unconquered virgin, Wherewith she freezed her foes to congealed stone, But rigid looks of chaste austerity, And noble grace that dashed brute violence With sudden adoration and blank awe? So dear to Heaven is saintly chastity That, when a soul is found sincerely so, A thousand liveried angels lackey her, Driving far off each thing of sin and guilt, And in clear dream and solemn vision Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear; Till oft converse with heavenly habitants Begin to cast a beam on the outward shape, The unpolluted temple of the mind, And turns it by degrees to the soul's essence, Till all be made immortal. But, when lust, By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk, But most by lewd and lavish act of sin, Lets in defilement to the inward parts, The soul grows clotted by contagion, Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite lose The divine property of her first being. Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp Oft seen in charnel-vaults and sepulchres, Lingering and sitting by a new-made grave, As loth to leave the body that it loved, And linked itself by carnal sensualty To a degenerate and degraded state. How charming is divine Philosophy! Not harsh and crabbed, as dull fools suppose, But musical as is Apollo's lute, And a perpetual feast of nectared sweets, Where no crude surfeit reigns. List! list! I hear Some far-off hallo break the silent air. Methought so too; what should it be? For certain, Either some one, like us, night-foundered here, Or else some neighbor woodman, or, at worst, Some roving robber calling to his fellows. Heaven help my sister! Again, again, and near! Best draw, and stand upon our guard. I'll hallo. If he be friendly, he comes well: if not, Defence is a good cause, and Heaven be for us! The Attendant Spirit, habited like a shepherd. That hallo I should know. What are you? speak. Come not too near; you fall on iron stakes else. What voice is that? my young lord? speak again. O brother, 'tis my father's Shepherd, sure. Thyrsis! whose artful strains have oft delayed The huddling brook to hear his madrigal, And sweetened every musk-rose of the dale. How camest thou here, good swain? Hath any ram Slipped from the fold, or young kid lost his dam, Or straggling wether the pent flock forsook? How could'st thou find this dark sequestered nook? O my loved master's heir, and his next joy, I came not here on such a trivial toy As a strayed ewe, or to pursue the stealth Of pilfering wolf; not all the fleecy wealth That doth enrich these downs is worth a thought To this my errand, and the care it brought. But, oh! my virgin Lady, where is she? How chance she is not in your company? To tell thee sadly, Shepherd, without blame Or our neglect, we lost her as we came. Ay me unhappy! then my fears are true. What fears, good Thyrsis? Prithee briefly shew. I'll tell ye. 'Tis not vain or fabulous Though so esteemed by shallow ignorance What the sage poets, taught by the heavenly Muse, Storied of old in high immortal verse Of dire Chimeras and enchanted isles, And rifted rocks whose entrance leads to Hell; For such there be, but unbelief is blind. Within the navel of this hideous wood, Immured in cypress shades, a sorcerer dwells, Of Bacchus and of Circe born, great Comus, Deep skilled in all his mother's witcheries, And here to every thirsty wanderer By sly enticement gives his baneful cup, With many murmurs mixed, whose pleasing poison The visage quite transforms of him that drinks, And the inglorious likeness of a beast Fixes instead, unmoulding reason's mintage Charactered in the face. This have I learnt Tending my flocks hard by i' the hilly crofts That brow this bottom glade; whence night by night He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl Like stabled wolves, or tigers at their prey, Doing abhorred rites to Hecate In their obscured haunts of inmost bowers. Yet have they many baits and guileful spells To inveigle and invite the unwary sense Of them that pass unweeting by the way. This evening late, by then the chewing flocks Had ta'en their supper on the savory herb Of knot-grass dew-besprent, and were in fold, I sat me down to watch upon a bank With ivy canopied, and interwove With flaunting honeysuckle, and began, Wrapt in a pleasing fit of melancholy, To meditate my rural minstrelsy, Till fancy had her fill. But ere a close The wonted roar was up amidst the woods, And filled the air with barbarous dissonance; At which I ceased, and listened them a while, Till an unusual stop of sudden silence Gave respite to the drowsy-flighted steeds That draw the litter of close-curtained Sleep. At last a soft and solemn-breathing sound Rose like a steam of rich distilled perfumes, And stole upon the air, that even Silence Was took ere she was ware, and wished she might Deny her nature, and be never more, Still to be so displaced. I was all ear, And took in strains that might create a soul Under the ribs of Death. But, oh! ere long Too well I did perceive it was the voice Of my most honored Lady, your dear sister. Amazed I stood, harrowed with grief and fear; And 'O poor hapless nightingale,' thought I, 'How sweet thou sing'st, how near the deadly snare!' Then down the lawns I ran with headlong haste, Through paths and turnings often trod by day, Till, guided by mine ear, I found the place Where that damned wizard, hid in sly disguise For so by certain signs I knew , had met Already, ere my best speed could prevent, The aidless innocent lady, his wished prey; Who gently asked if he had seen such two, Supposing him some neighbor villager. Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guessed Ye were the two she meant; with that I sprung Into swift flight, till I had found you here; But further know I not. O night and shades, How are ye joined with hell in triple knot Against the unarmed weakness of one virgin, Alone and helpless! Is this the confidence You gave me, brother? Yes, and keep it still; Lean on it safely; not a period Shall be unsaid for me. Against the threats Of malice or of sorcery, or that power Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm: Virtue may be assailed, but never hurt, Surprised by unjust force, but not enthralled; Yea, even that which Mischief meant most harm Shall in the happy trial prove most glory. But evil on itself shall back recoil, And mix no more with goodness, when at last, Gathered like scum, and settled to itself, It shall be in eternal restless change Self-fed and self-consumed. If this fail, The pillared firmament is rottenness, And earth's base built on stubble. But come, let's on! Against the opposing will and arm of Heaven May never this just sword be lifted up; But for that damned magician, let him be girt With all the griesly legions that troop Under the sooty flag of Acheron, Harpies and Hydras, or all the monstrous forms 'Twixt Africa and Ind, I'll find him out, And force him to return his purchase back, Or drag him by the curls to a foul death, Cursed as his life. Alas! good venturous youth, I love thy courage yet, and bold emprise; But here thy sword can do thee little stead. Far other arms and other weapons must Be those that quell the might of hellish charms. He with his bare wand can unthread thy joints, And crumble all thy sinews. Why, prithee, Shepherd, How durst thou then thyself approach so near As to make this relation? Care and utmost shifts How to secure the Lady from surprisal Brought to my mind a certain shepherd lad, Of small regard to see to, yet well skilled In every virtuous plant and healing herb That spreads her verdant leaf to the morning ray. He loved me well, and oft would beg me sing; Which when I did, he on the tender grass Would sit, and hearken even to ecstasy, And in requital ope his leathern scrip, And show me simples of a thousand names, Telling their strange and vigorous faculties. Amongst the rest a small unsightly root, But of divine effect, he culled me out. The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it, But in another country, as he said, Bore a bright golden flower, but not in this soil: Unknown, and like esteemed, and the dull swain Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon; And yet more med'cinal is it than that Moly That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave. He called it Haemony, and gave it me, And bade me keep it as of sovran use 'Gainst all enchantments, mildew blast, or damp, Or ghastly Furies' apparition. I pursed it up, but little reckoning made, Till now that this extremity compelled. But now I find it true; for by this means I knew the foul enchanter, though disguised, Entered the very lime-twigs of his spells, And yet came off. If you have this about you As I will give you when we go you may Boldly assault the necromancer's hall; Where if he be, with dauntless hardihood And brandished blade rush on him: break his glass, And shed the luscious liquor on the ground; But seize his wand. Though he and his curst crew Fierce sign of battle make, and menace high, Or, like the sons of Vulcan, vomit smoke, Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink. Thyrsis, lead on apace; I'll follow thee; And some good angel bear a shield before us! The Scene changes to a stately palace, set out with all manner of Nay, Lady, sit. If I but wave this wand, Your nerves are all chained up in alabaster, And you a statue, or as Daphne was, Root-bound, that fled Apollo. Fool, do not boast. Thou canst not touch the freedom of my mind With all thy charms, although this corporal rind Thou hast immanacled while Heaven sees good. Why are you vexed, Lady? why do you frown? Here dwell no frowns, nor anger; from these gates Sorrow flies far. See, here be all the pleasures That fancy can beget on youthful thoughts, When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns Brisk as the April buds in primrose season. And first behold this cordial julep here, That flames and dances in his crystal bounds, With spirits of balm and fragrant syrups mixed. Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone Is of such power to stir up joy as this, To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst. Why should you be so cruel to yourself, And to those dainty limbs, which Nature lent For gentle usage and soft delicacy? But you invert the covenants of her trust, And harshly deal, like an ill borrower, With that which you received on other terms, Scorning the unexempt condition By which all mortal frailty must subsist, Refreshment after toil, ease after pain, That have been tired all day without repast, And timely rest have wanted. But, fair virgin, This will restore all soon. 'Twill not, false traitor! 'Twill not restore the truth and honesty That thou hast banished from thy tongue with lies. Was this the cottage and the safe abode Thou told'st me of? What grim aspects are these, These oughly-headed monsters? Mercy guard me! Hence with thy brewed enchantments, foul deceiver! Hast thou betrayed my credulous innocence With vizored falsehood and base forgery? And wouldst thou seek again to trap me here With liquorish baits, fit to ensnare a brute? Were it a draught for Juno when she banquets, I would not taste thy treasonous offer. None But such as are good men can give good things; And that which is not good is not delicious To a well-governed and wise appetite. O foolishness of men! that lend their ears To those budge doctors of the stoic fur, And fetch their precepts from the Cynic tub, Praising the lean and sallow Abstinence! Wherefore did Nature pour her bounties forth With such a full and unwithdrawing hand, Covering the earth with odors, fruits, and flocks, Thronging the seas with spawn innumerable, But all to please and sate the curious taste? And set to work millions of spinning worms, That in their green shops weave the smooth-haired silk, To deck her sons; and, that no corner might Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loins She hutched the all-worshipped ore and precious gems, To store her children with. If all the world Should, in a fit of temperance, feed on pulse, Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but frieze, The All-giver would be unthanked, would be unpraised, Not half his riches known, and yet despised; And we should serve him as a grudging master, Who would be quite surcharged with her own weight, And strangled with her waste fertility: The earth cumbered, and the winged air darked with plumes, The herds would over-multitude their lords; The sea o'erfraught would swell, and the unsought diamonds Would so emblaze the forehead of the deep, And so bestud with stars, that they below Would grow inured to light, and come at last To gaze upon the sun with shameless brows. List, Lady; be not coy, and be not cozened With that same vaunted name, Virginity. Beauty is Nature's coin; must not be hoarded, But must be current; and the good thereof Consists in mutual and partaken bliss, Unsavory in the enjoyment of itself. If you let slip time, like a neglected rose It withers on the stalk with languished head. Beauty is Nature's brag, and must be shown In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities, Where most may wonder at the workmanship. It is for homely features to keep home; They had their name thence: coarse complexions And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply The sampler, and to tease the huswife's wool. What need a vermeil-tinctured lip for that, Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the morn? There was another meaning in these gifts; Think what, and be advised; you are but young yet. I had not thought to have unlocked my lips In this unhallowed air, but that this juggler Would think to charm my judgment, as mine eyes, Obtruding false rules pranked in reason's garb. I hate when vice can bolt her arguments And virtue has no tongue to check her pride. Impostor! do not charge most innocent Nature, As if she would her children should be riotous With her abundance. She, good cateress, Means her provision only to the good, That live according to her sober laws, And holy dictate of spare Temperance. If every just man that now pines with want Had but a moderate and beseeming share Of that which lewdly-pampered Luxury Now heaps upon some few with vast excess, Nature's full blessings would be well-dispensed In unsuperfluous even proportion, And she no whit encumbered with her store; And then the Giver would be better thanked, His praise due paid: for swinish gluttony Ne'er looks to Heaven amidst his gorgeous feast, But with besotted base ingratitude Crams, and blasphemes his Feeder. Shall I go on? Or have I said enow? To him that dares Arm his profane tongue with contemptuous words Against the sun-clad power of chastity Fain would I something say; yet to what end? Thou hast nor ear, nor soul, to apprehend The sublime notion and high mystery That must be uttered to unfold the sage And serious doctrine of Virginity; And thou art worthy that thou shouldst not know More happiness than this thy present lot. Enjoy your dear wit, and gay rhetoric, That hath so well been taught her dazzling fence; Thou art not fit to hear thyself convinced. Yet, should I try, the uncontrolled worth Of this pure cause would kindle my rapt spirits To such a flame of sacred vehemence And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake, Till all thy magic structures, reared so high, Were shattered into heaps o'er thy false head. She fables not. I feel that I do fear Her words set off by some superior power; And, though not mortal, yet a cold shuddering dew Dips me all o'er, as when the wrath of Jove Speaks thunder and the chains of Erebus To some of Saturn's crew. I must dissemble, And try her yet more strongly, Come, no more! This is mere moral babble, and direct Against the canon laws of our foundation. I must not suffer this; yet 'tis but the lees And settlings of a melancholy blood. But this will cure all straight; one sip of this Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight Beyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste.... What! have you let the false enchanter scape? O ye mistook; ye should have snatched his wand, And bound him fast. Without his rod reversed, And backward mutters of dissevering power, We cannot free the Lady that sits here In stony fetters fixed and motionless. Yet stay: be not disturbed; now I bethink me, Some other means I have which may be used, Which once of Meliboeus old I learnt, The soothest shepherd that e'er piped on plains. There is a gentle Nymph not far from hence, That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream: Sabrina is her name: a virgin pure; Whilom she was the daughter of Locrine, That had the sceptre from his father Brute. She, guiltless damsel, flying the mad pursuit Of her enraged stepdame, Guendolen, Commended her fair innocence to the flood That stayed her flight with his cross-flowing course. The water-nymphs, that in the bottom played, Held up their pearled wrists, and took her in, Bearing her straight to aged Nereus' hall; Who, piteous of her woes, reared her lank head, And gave her to his daughters to imbathe In nectared lavers strewed with asphodel, And through the porch and inlet of each sense Dropt in ambrosial oils, till she revived, And underwent a quick immortal change, Made Goddess of the river. Still she retains Her maiden gentleness, and oft at eve Visits the herds along the twilight meadows, Helping all urchin blasts, and ill-luck signs That the shrewd meddling elf delights to make, Which she with precious vialed liquors heals: For which the shepherds, at their festivals, Carol her goodness loud in rustic lays, And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream Of pansies, pinks, and gaudy daffodils. And, as the old swain said, she can unlock The clasping charm, and thaw the numbing spell, If she be right invoked in warbled song; For maidenhood she loves, and will be swift To aid a virgin, such as was herself, In hard-besetting need. This will I try, And add the power of some adjuring verse. Sabrina fair, Listen where thou art sitting Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave, In twisted braids of lilies knitting The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair; Listen for dear honor's sake, Goddess of the silver lake, Listen and save! Listen, and appear to us, In name of great Oceanus, By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace, And Tethys' grave majestic pace; By hoary Nereus' wrinkled look, And the Carpathian wizard's hook; By scaly Triton's winding shell, And old soothsaying Glaucus' spell; By Leucothea's lovely hands, And her son that rules the strands; By Thetis' tinsel-slippered feet, And the songs of Sirens sweet; By dead Parthenope's dear tomb, And fair Ligea's golden comb, Wherewith she sits on diamond rocks Sleeking her soft alluring locks; By all the nymphs that nightly dance Upon thy streams with wily glance; Rise, rise, and heave thy rosy head From thy coral-paven bed, And bridle in thy headlong wave, Till thou our summons answered have. Listen and save! Sabrina rises, attended by Water-nymphs, and sings. By the rushy-fringed bank, Where grow the willow and the osier dank, My sliding chariot stays, Thick set with agate, and the azurn sheen Of turkis blue, and emerald green, That in the channel strays: Whilst from off the waters fleet Thus I set my printless feet O'er the cowslip's velvet head, That bends not as I tread. Gentle swain, at thy request I am here! Goddess dear, We implore thy powerful hand To undo the charmed band Of true virgin here distressed Through the force and through the wile Of unblessed enchanter vile. Sabr. Shepherd, 'tis my office best To help ensnared chastity. Brightest Lady, look on me. Thus I sprinkle on thy breast Drops that from my fountain pure I have kept of precious cure; Thrice upon thy finger's tip, Thrice upon thy rubied lip: Next this marble venomed seat, Smeared with gums of glutinous heat, I touch with chaste palms moist and cold. Now the spell hath lost his hold, And I must haste ere morning hour To wait in Amphitrite's bower. Sabrina descends, and the Lady rises out of her seat. Virgin, daughter of Locrine, Sprung of old Anchises' line, May thy brimmed waves for this Their full tribute never miss From a thousand petty rills, That tumble down the snowy hills: Summer drouth or singed air Never scorch thy tresses fair, Nor wet October's torrent flood Thy molten crystal fill with mud; May thy billows roll ashore The beryl and the golden ore; May thy lofty head be crowned With many a tower and terrace round, And here and there thy banks upon With groves of myrrh and cinnamon. Come, Lady; while Heaven lends us grace, Let us fly this cursed place, Lest the sorcerer us entice With some other new device. Not a waste or needless sound Till we come to holier ground. I shall be your faithful guide Through this gloomy covert wide; And not many furlongs thence Is your Father's residence, Where this night are met in state Many a friend to gratulate His wished presence, and beside All the swains that there abide With jigs and rural dance resort. We shall catch them at their sport, And our sudden coming there Will double all their mirth and cheer. Come, let us haste; the stars grow high, But Night sits monarch yet in the mid sky. Back, shepherds, back! Enough your play Till next sun-shine holiday. Here be, without duck or nod, Other trippings to be trod Of lighter toes, and such court guise As Mercury did first devise With the mincing Dryades On the lawns and on the leas. This second Song presents them to their Father and Mother. Noble Lord and Lady bright, I have brought ye new delight. Here behold so goodly grown Three fair branches of your own. Heaven hath timely tried their youth, Their faith, their patience, and their truth, And sent them here through hard assays With a crown of deathless praise, To triumph in victorious dance O'er sensual folly and intemperance. The dances ended, the Spirit epiloguizes. To the ocean now I fly, And those happy climes that lie Where day never shuts his eye, Up in the broad fields of the sky. There I suck the liquid air, All amidst the gardens fair Of Hesperus, and his daughters three That sing about the golden tree. Along the crisped shades and bowers Revels the spruce and jocund Spring; The Graces and the rosy-bosomed Hours Thither all their bounties bring. There eternal Summer dwells, And west winds with musky wing About the cedarn alleys fling Nard and cassia's balmy smells. Iris there with humid bow Waters the odorous banks, that blow Flowers of more mingled hue Than her purfled scarf can shew, And drenches with Elysian dew List, mortals, if your ears be true Beds of hyacinth and roses, Where young Adonis oft reposes, Waxing well of his deep wound, In slumbers soft, and on the ground Sadly sits the Assyrian queen. But far above, in spangled sheen, Celestial Cupid, her famed son, advanced Holds his dear Psyche, sweet entranced After her wandering labors long, Till free consent the gods among Make her his eternal bride, And from her fair unspotted side Two blissful twins are to be born, Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn. But now my task is smoothly done: I can fly, or I can run Quickly to the green earth's end, Where the bowed welkin slow doth bend, And from thence can soar as soon To the corners of the moon. Mortals, that would follow me, Love Virtue; she alone is free. She can teach ye how to climb Higher than the sphery chime; Or, if Virtue feeble were, Heaven itself would stoop to her. Yet once more, O ye laurels, and once more, Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere, I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude, And with forced fingers rude Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year. Bitter constraint and sad occasion dear Compels me to disturb your season due; For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime, Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer. Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme. He must not float upon his watery bier Unwept, and welter to the parching wind, Without the meed of some melodious tear. Begin, then, Sisters of the sacred well That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring; Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string. Hence with denial vain and coy excuse: So may some gentle Muse With lucky words favor my destined urn, And as he passes turn, And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud! For we were nursed upon the self-same hill, Fed the same flock, by fountain, shade, and rill; Together both, ere the high lawns appeared Under the opening eyelids of the Morn, We drove a-field, and both together heard What time the gray-fly winds her sultry horn, Battening our flocks with the fresh dews of night, Oft till the star that rose at evening bright Toward heaven's descent had sloped his westering wheel. Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute; Tempered to the oaten flute Rough Satyrs danced, and Fauns with cloven heel From the glad sound would not be absent long; And old Damoetas loved to hear our song. But, oh! the heavy change, now thou art gone, Now thou art gone and never must return! Thee, Shepherd, thee the woods and desert caves, With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown, And all their echoes, mourn. The willows, and the hazel copses green, Shall now no more be seen Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays. As killing as the canker to the rose, Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze, Or frost to flowers, that their gay wardrobe wear, When first the white-thorn blows; Such Lycidas, thy loss to shepherd's ear. Where were ye, Nymphs, when the remorseless deep Closed o'er the head of your loved Lycidas? For neither were ye playing on the steep Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie, Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high, Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream. Ay me! I fondly dream Had ye been there, ... for what could that have done? What could the Muse herself that Orpheus bore, The Muse herself, for her enchanting son, Whom universal nature did lament, When, by the rout that made the hideous roar, His gory visage down the stream was sent, Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore? Alas! what boots it with uncessant care To tend the homely, slighted, shepherd's trade, And strictly meditate the thankless Muse? Were it not better done, as others use, To sport with Amaryllis in the shade, Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair? Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise That last infirmity of noble mind To scorn delights and live laborious days; But the fair guerdon when we hope to find, And think to burst out into sudden blaze, Comes the blind Fury with the abhorred shears, And slits the thin-spun life. But not the praise, Phoebus replied, and touched my trembling ears: Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil, Nor in the glistering foil Set off to the world, nor in broad rumor lies, But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes And perfect witness of all-judging Jove; As he pronounces lastly on each deed, Of so much fame in heaven expect thy meed. O fountain Arethuse, and thou honored flood, Smooth-sliding Mincius, crowned with vocal reeds, That strain I heard was of a higher mood. But now my oat proceeds, And listens to the Herald of the Sea, That came in Neptune's plea. He asked the waves, and asked the felon winds, What hard mishap hath doomed this gentle swain? And questioned every gust of rugged wings That blows from off each beaked promontory. They knew not of his story; And sage Hippotades their answer brings, That not a blast was from his dungeon strayed: The air was calm, and on the level brine Sleek Panope with all her sisters played. It was that fatal and perfidious bark, Built in the eclipse, and rigged with curses dark, That sunk so low that sacred head of thine. Next, Camus, reverend sire, went footing slow, His mantle hairy, and his bonnet sedge, Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge Like to that sanguine flower inscribed with woe. Ah! who hath reft, quoth he, my dearest pledge? Last came, and last did go, Two massy keys he bore of metals twain The golden opes, the iron shuts amain . He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake: How well could I have spared for thee, young swain, Enow of such as, for their bellies' sake, Creep, and intrude, and climb into the fold! Of other care they little reckoning make Than how to scramble at the shearers' feast, And shove away the worthy bidden guest. Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold A sheep-hook, or have learnt aught else the least That to the faithful herdman's art belongs! What recks it them? What need they? They are sped; And, when they list, their lean and flashy songs Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw; The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed, But swoln with wind and the rank mist they draw, Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread; Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw Daily devours apace, and nothing said. But that two-handed engine at the door Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more. Return, Alpheus; the dread voice is past That shrunk thy streams; return, Sicilian Muse, And call the vales, and bid them hither cast Their bells and flowerets of a thousand hues. Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use Of shades, and wanton winds, and gushing brooks, On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks, Throw hither all your quaint enamelled eyes, That on the green turf suck the honeyed showers, And purple all the ground with vernal flowers. Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies, The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine, The white pink, and the pansy freaked with jet, The glowing violet, The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine, With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head, And every flower that sad embroidery wears; Bid amaranthus all his beauty shed, And daffadillies fill their cups with tears, To strew the laureate hearse where Lycid lies. For so, to interpose a little ease, Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise. Ay me! whilst thee the shores and sounding seas Wash far away, where'er thy bones are hurled; Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides, Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world; Or whether thou, to our moist vows denied, Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old, Where the great Vision of the guarded mount Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold. Look homeward, Angel, now, and melt with ruth: And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth. Weep no more, woeful shepherds, weep no more, For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead, Sunk though he be beneath the watery floor. So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed, And yet anon repairs his drooping head, And tricks his beams, and with new-spangled ore Flames in the forehead of the morning sky: So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high, Through the dear might of Him that walked the waves, Where, other groves and other streams along, With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves, And hears the unexpressive nuptial song, In the blest kingdoms meek of joy and love. There entertain him all the Saints above, In solemn troops, and sweet societies, That sing, and singing in their glory move, And wipe the tears forever from his eyes. Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more; Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore, In thy large recompense, and shalt be good To all that wander in that perilous flood. Thus sang the uncouth swain to the oaks and rills, While the still morn went out with sandals gray: He touched the tender stops of various quills, With eager thought warbling his Doric lay: And now the sun had stretched out all the hills, And now was dropt into the western bay. At last he rose, and twitched his mantle blue; To-morrow to fresh woods, and pastures new. O Nightingale that on yon bloomy spray Warblest at eve, when all the woods are still, Thou with fresh hope the lover's heart dost fill, While the jolly Hours lead on propitious May. Thy liquid notes that close the eye of day, First heard before the shallow cuckoo's bill, Portend success in love. O, if Jove's will Have linked that amorous power to thy soft lay, Now timely sing, ere the rude bird of hate Foretell my hopeless doom, in some grove nigh; As thou from year to year hast sung too late For my relief, yet hadst no reason why. Whether the Muse or Love called thee his mate, Both them I serve, and of their train am I. How soon hath Time, the subtle thief of youth, Stolen on his wing my three-and-twentieth year! My hasting days fly on with full career, But my late spring no bud or blossom shew'th. Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth That I to manhood am arrived so near; And inward ripeness doth much less appear, That some more timely-happy spirits endu'th. Yet, be it less or more, or soon or slow, It shall be still in strictest measure even To that same lot, however mean or high, Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heaven. All is, if I have grace to use it so, As ever in my great Task-Master's eye. Whose chance on these defenceless doors may seize, If deed of honor did thee ever please, Guard them, and him within protect from harms. He can requite thee; for he knows the charms That call fame on such gentle acts as these, And he can spread thy name o'er lands and seas, Whatever clime the sun's bright circle warms. Lift not thy spear against the Muses' bower: The great Emathian conqueror bid spare The house of Pindarus, when temple and tower Went to the ground; and the repeated air Of sad Electra's poet had the power To save the Athenian walls from ruin bare. Lady, that in the prime of earliest youth Wisely hast shunned the broad way and the green, And with those few art eminently seen That labor up the hill of heavenly Truth, The better part with Mary and with Ruth Chosen thou hast; and they that overween, And at thy growing virtues fret their spleen, No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth. Thy care is fixed, and zealously attends To fill thy odorous lamp with deeds of light, And hope that reaps not shame. Therefore be sure Thou, when the Bridegroom with his feastful friends Passes to bliss at the mid-hour of night, Hast gained thy entrance, Virgin wise, and pure. Daughter to that good Earl, once President Of England's Council and her Treasury, Who lived in both unstained with gold or fee, And left them both, more in himself content, Till the sad breaking of that Parliament Broke him, as that dishonest victory At Chaeronea, fatal to liberty, Killed with report that old man eloquent, Though later born than to have known the days Wherein your father flourished, yet by you, Madam, methinks I see him living yet: So well your words his noble virtues praise That all both judge you to relate them true And to possess them, honored Margaret. Harry, whose tuneful and well-measured song First taught our English music how to span Words with just note and accent, not to scan With Midas' ears, committing short and long, Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng, With praise enough for Envy to look wan; To after age thou shalt be writ the man That with smooth air couldst humor best our tongue. Thou honor'st Verse, and Verse must send her wing To honor thee, the priest of Phoebus' quire, That tunest their happiest lines in hymn or story. Dante shall give Fame leave to set thee higher Than his Casella, whom he wooed to sing, Met in the milder shades of Purgatory. Fairfax, whose name in arms through Europe rings, Filling each mouth with envy or with praise, And all her jealous monarchs with amaze, And rumors loud that daunt remotest kings, Thy firm unshaken virtue ever brings Victory home, though new rebellions raise Their Hydra heads, and the false North displays Her broken league to imp their serpent wings. O yet a nobler task awaits thy hand For what can war but endless war still breed? Till truth and right from violence be freed, And public faith cleared from the shameful brand Of public fraud. In vain doth Valor bleed, While Avarice and Rapine share the land. Cromwell, our chief of men, who through a cloud Not of war only, but detractions rude, Guided by faith and matchless fortitude, To peace and truth thy glorious way hast ploughed, And on the neck of crowned Fortune proud Hast reared God's trophies, and his work pursued, While Darwen stream, with blood of Scots imbrued, And Dunbar field, resounds thy praises loud, And Worcester's laureate wreath: yet much remains To conquer still; Peace hath her victories No less renowned than War: new foes arise, Threatening to bind our souls with secular chains. Help us to save free conscience from the paw Of hireling wolves, whose Gospel is their maw. Vane, young in years, but in sage counsel old, Than whom a better senator ne'er held The helm of Rome, when gowns, not arms, repelled The fierce Epirot and the African bold, Whether to settle peace, or to unfold The drift of hollow states hard to be spelled; Then to advise how war may best, upheld, Move by her two main nerves, iron and gold, In all her equipage; besides, to know Both spiritual power and civil, what each means, What severs each, thou hast learned, which few have done. The bounds of either sword to thee we owe: Therefore on thy firm hand Religion leans In peace, and reckons thee her eldest son. Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints, whose bones Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold; Even them who kept thy truth so pure of old, When all our fathers worshiped stocks and stones, Forget not: in thy book record their groans Who were thy sheep, and in their ancient fold Slain by the bloody Piedmontese, that rolled Mother with infant down the rocks. Their moans The vales redoubled to the hills, and they To heaven. Their martyred blood and ashes sow O'er all the Italian fields, where still doth sway The triple Tyrant; that from these may grow A hundredfold, who, having learnt thy way, Early may fly the Babylonian woe. When I consider how my light is spent Ere half my days in this dark world and wide, And that one talent which is death to hide Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent To serve therewith my Maker, and present My true account, lest He returning chide, Doth God exact day-labor, light denied? I fondly ask. But Patience, to prevent That murmur, soon replies, God doth not need Either man's work or his own gifts. Who best Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state Is kingly; thousands at his bidding speed, And post o'er land and ocean without rest; They also serve who only stand and wait. Lawrence, of virtuous father virtuous son, Now that the fields are dank, and ways are mire, Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire Help waste a sullen day, what may be won From the hard season gaining? Time will run On smoother, till Favonius reinspire The frozen earth, and clothe in fresh attire The lily and rose, that neither sowed nor spun. What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice, Of Attic taste, with wine, whence we may rise To hear the lute well touched, or artful voice Warble immortal notes and Tuscan air? He who of those delights can judge, and spare To interpose them oft, is not unwise. Cyriack, whose grandsire on the royal bench Of British Themis, with no mean applause, Pronounced, and in his volumes taught, our laws, Which others at their bar so often wrench, To-day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench In mirth that after no repenting draws; Let Euclid rest, and Archimedes pause, And what the Swede intend, and what the French. To measure life learn thou betimes, and know Toward solid good what leads the nearest way; For other things mild Heaven a time ordains, And disapproves that care, though wise in show, That with superfluous burden loads the day, And, when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains. Cyriack, this three years' day these eyes, though clear, To outward view, of blemish or of spot, Bereft of light, their seeing have forgot; Nor to their idle orbs doth sight appear Of sun, or moon, or star, throughout the year, Or man, or woman. Yet I argue not Against Heaven's hand or will, nor bate a jot Of heart or hope, but still bear up and steer Right onward. What supports me, dost thou ask? The conscience, friend, to have lost them overplied In Liberty's defence, my noble task, Of which all Europe rings from side to side. This thought might lead me through the world's vain mask Content, though blind, had I no better guide. Methought I saw my late espoused saint Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave, Whom Jove's great son to her glad husband gave, Rescued from Death by force, though pale and faint. Mine, as whom washed from spot of child-bed taint Purification in the Old Law did save, And such as yet once more I trust to have Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint, Came vested all in white, pure as her mind. Her face was veiled; yet to my fancied sight Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shined So clear as in no face with more delight. But, oh! as to embrace me she inclined, I waked, she fled, and day brought back my night. Now, contrary, if I read aught in Heaven, Or Heaven write aught of fate, by what the stars Voluminous, or single characters In their conjunction met, give me to spell, Sorrows and labors, opposition, hate, Attends thee; scorns, reproaches, injuries, Violence and stripes, and, lastly, cruel death. Fell round the path of Milton, in his hand The Thing became a trumpet; whence he blew Soul-animating strains, alas too few. But tossing lately on a sleepless bed, I of a token thought which Lovers heed; How among them it was a common tale, That it was good to hear the Nightingale Ere the vile Cuckoo's note be uttered. Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud? Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? <|endofpoem|> Electra, Agamemnon's child, I come Unto thy desert home, Who the virtuous young lady was is not known. Was CAR then Crashawe; or was Crashawe Car, Since both within one name combined are? Yes, Car's Crashawe, he Car; 'tis loue alone Which melts two harts, of both composing one. So Crashaw's still the same: so much desired By strongest witts; so honor'd, so admired; Car was but he that enter'd as a friend With whom he shar'd his thoughtes, and did commend While yet he liu'd this worke; they lou'd each other: Sweete Crashawe was his friend; he Crashawe's brother. So Car hath title then; 'twas his intent That what his riches pen'd, poore Car should print; Nor feares he checke, praysing that happie one Who was belou'd by all; disprais'd by none: To witt, being pleas'd with all things, he pleas'd all, Nor would he giue, nor take offence; befall What might, he would possesse himselfe, and liue As deade deuoyde of interest t' all might giue Desease t' his well-composed mynd; fore-stal'd With heauenly riches; which had wholy call'd His thoughts from earth, to liue aboue in th' aire A very bird of paradice. No care Had he of earthly trashe. What might suffice To fitt his soule to heauenly exercise Sufficed him: and may we guesse his hart By what his lipps brings forth, his onely part Is God and godly thoughtes. Leaues doubt to none But that to whom one God is all; all's one. What he might eate or weare he tooke no thought; His needfull foode he rather found then sought. He seekes no downes, no sheetes, his bed's still made; If he can find a chaire or stoole, he's layd. When Day peepes in, he quitts his restlesse rest, And still, poore soule, before he's vp, he's dre'st. Thus dying did he liue, yet liued to dye In th' Virgin's lappe, to whom he did applye His virgine thoughtes and words, and thence was styld By foes, the chaplaine of the virgine myld, While yet he liued without. His modestie Imparted this to some, and they to me. Liue happie then, deare soule! inioy the rest Eternally by paynes thou purchacedst, While Car must liue in care, who was thy friend, Nor cares he how he liue, so in the end He may inioy his dearest Lord and thee; And sitt and singe more skilfull songs eternally. 'Twixt pen and pensill rose a holy strife Which might draw Vertue better to the life: Best witts gaue votes to that, but painters swore They neuer saw peeces so sweete before As thes fruits of pure Nature; where no Art Did lead the vntaught pensill, nor had part The hand growne bold, with witt will needes contest: Doth it preuayle? ah no! say each is best. This to the eare speakes wonders; that will trye To speake the same, yet lowder, to the eye. Both in their aymes are holy, both conspire To wound, to burne the hart with heauenly fire. This then's the doome, to doe both parties right: This to the eare speakes best; that, to the sight. It is clear from these lines in the former poem 'Car was but he that enter'd as a friend With whom he shar'd his thoughtes, and did commend So Car hath title then; ' twas his intent That what his riches pen'd, poore Car should print ' 'Tis not the work of force but skill To find the way into man's will. 'Tis loue alone can hearts vnlock: Who knowes the Word, he needs not knock. Lo, where a wounded heart, with bleeding eyes conspire: Is she a flaming fountaine, or a weeping fire? Poet and Saint! thy sky was dark And sad thy lonely vigil here; But thy meek spirit, like the lark Still showered music on the ear, From its own heaven ever clear: No pining mourner thou! thy strain Could breathe a slumber upon Pain, Singing thy tears asleep: not long To stray by Siloa's brook was thine: Yet Time hath never dealt thee wrong, Nor brush'd the sweet bloom from thy line: Thou hast a home in every song, In every Christian heart, a shrine. Poet and Saint! to thee alone are giv'n The two most sacred names of Earth and Heav'n, The hardest, rarest union which can be Next that of godhead with humanity. Long did the Muses banish'd slaves abide, And built vain pyramids to mortal pride; Like Moses thou tho' spells and charms withstand Hast brought them nobly home, back to their Holy Land. Ah, wretched we, Poets of Earth! but thou Wert living, the same Poet which thou'rt now; Whilst angels sing to thee their ayres divine, And joy in an applause so great as thine. Equal society with them to hold, Thou need'st not make new songs, but say the old; And they kind spirits! shall all rejoice to see, How little less than they, exalted man may be. Still the old heathen gods in numbers dwell, The heav'nliest thing on Earth still keeps up Hell: Nor have we yet quite purg'd the Christian land; Still idols here, like calves at Bethel stand. And tho' Pan's death long since all or'cles broke, Yet still in rhyme the fiend Apollo spoke; Nay, with the worst of heathen dotage, we Vain men! the monster woman deifie; Find stars, and tie our fates there in a face, And Paradise in them, by whom we lost it, place. What diff'rent faults corrupt our Muses thus? Wanton as girls, as old wives, fabulous. Thy spotless Muse, like Mary, did contain The boundless Godhead; she did well disdain That her eternal verse employ'd should be On a less subject than eternity; And for a sacred mistress scorn'd to take But her whom God Himself scorn'd not His spouse to make: It in a kind her miracle did do, A fruitful mother was, and virgin too. How well blest Swan did Fate contrive thy death, And made thee render up thy tuneful breath In thy great mistress's arms! Thou most divine, And richest off'ring of Loretto's shrine! Where, like some holy sacrifice t' expire, A fever burns thee, and Love lights the fire. Angels they say brought the fam'd chappel there, And bore the sacred load in triumph thro' the air: 'Tis surer much they brought thee there; and they, And thou, their charge, went singing all the way. Pardon, my Mother-Church, if I consent That angels led him, when from thee he went; For ev'n in error, sure no danger is, When join'd with so much piety as his. Ah! mighty God, with shame I speak't, and grief; Ah! that our greatest faults were in belief! And our weak reason were ev'n weaker yet, Rather than thus, our wills too strong for it. His faith, perhaps, in some nice tenets might Be wrong; his life, I'm sure, was in the right: And I, myself, a Catholick will be; So far at least, great Saint! to pray to thee. Hail, Bard triumphant! and some care bestow On us, the Poets militant below: Oppos'd by our old enemy, adverse Chance, Attack'd by Envy and by Ignorance; Enchain'd by Beauty, tortur'd by desires, Expos'd by tyrant-love, to savage beasts and fires. Thou from low Earth in nobler flames didst rise, And like Elijah, mount alive the skies. Elisha-like but with a wish much less, More fit thy greatness and my littleness; Lo here I beg I whom thou once didst prove So humble to esteem, so good to love Not that thy sp'rit might on me doubled be, I ask but half thy mighty sp'rit for me: And when my Muse soars with so strong a wing, 'Twill learn of things divine, and first of thee to sing. Live Iesus, live, and let it bee My life, to dye for love of Thee. Loe! where a wounded heart with bleeding eyes conspire. Is she a flaming fountain, or a weeping fire? Hail, sister springs! Parents of syluer-footed rills! Euer-bubling things! Thawing crystall! snowy hills Still spending, neuer spent! I mean Thy fair eyes, sweet Magdalene! Heauens thy fair eyes be; Heauens of euer-falling starres. 'Tis seed-time still with thee; And starres thou sow'st, whose haruest dares Promise the Earth, to counter-shine Whateuer makes heaun's forehead fine. But we' are deceiued all: Starres indeed they are too true; For they but seem to fall, As heaun's other spangles doe: To shine in things so pretious. Vpwards thou dost weep: Heaun's bosome drinks the gentle stream. Where th' milky riuers creep, Thine floates aboue, and is the cream. Waters aboue th' heauns, what they be We' are taught best by thy teares and thee. Euery morn from hence, A brisk cherub something sippes, Whose sacred influence Addes sweetnes to his sweetest lippes; Then to his musick; and his song Tasts of this breakfast all day long. When some new bright guest Takes vp among the starres a room, And Heaun will make a feast: Angels with crystall violls come phials And draw from these full eyes of thine, Their Master's water, their own wine. The deaw no more will weep The primrose's pale cheek to deck: The deaw no more will sleep Nuzzel'd in the lilly's neck; Much rather would it be thy tear, And leaue them both to tremble here. Not the soft gold which Steales from the amber-weeping tree, Makes Sorrow halfe so rich As the drops distil'd from thee. Sorrowe's best iewels lye in these Caskets, of which Heaven keeps the keyes. When Sorrow would be seen In her brightest majesty: Then is she drest by none but thee. Then, and only then, she weares Her proudest pearles: I mean, thy teares. Not in the Euening's eyes, When they red with weeping are For the Sun that dyes; Sitts Sorrow with a face so fair. Nowhere but here did ever meet Sweetnesse so sad, sadnesse so sweet. Sadnesse all the while Shee sits in such a throne as this, Can doe nought but smile, Nor beleeves she Sadnesse is: Gladnesse it selfe would be more glad, To bee made soe sweetly sad. There's no need at all, That the balsom-sweating bough So coyly should let fall His med'cinable teares; for now Nature hath learnt to' extract a deaw More soueraign and sweet, from you. Yet let the poore drops weep Weeping is the ease of Woe : Softly let them creep, Sad that they are vanquish't so. They, though to others no releife, Balsom may be for their own greife. Golden though he be, Golden Tagus murmures though. Were his way by thee, Content and quiet he would goe; Soe much more rich would he esteem Thy syluer, then his golden stream. Well does the May that lyes Smiling in thy cheeks, confesse The April in thine eyes; Mutuall sweetnesse they expresse. No April ere lent kinder showres, Nor May return'd more faithfull flowres. O cheeks! Bedds of chast loues, By your own showres seasonably dash't. Eyes! Nests of milky doues, In your own wells decently washt. O wit of Loue! that thus could place Fountain and garden in one face. O sweet contest! of woes With loues; of teares with smiles disputing! O fair and freindly foes, Each other kissing and confuting! While rain and sunshine, cheekes and eyes Close in kind contrarietyes. But can these fair flouds be Freinds with the bosom-fires that fill thee! Can so great flames agree Aeternal teares should thus distill thee! O flouds! O fires! O suns! O showres! Mixt and made freinds by Loue's sweet powres. 'Twas his well-pointed dart That digg'd these wells, and drest this wine; And taught the wounded heart The way into these weeping eyn. Vain loues auant! bold hands forbear! The Lamb hath dipp't His white foot here. And now where'ere He strayes, Among the Galilean mountaines, Or more vnwellcome wayes; He's follow'd by two faithfull fountaines; Two walking baths, two weeping motions, Portable, and compendious oceans. O thou, thy Lord's fair store! In thy so rich and rare expenses, Euen when He show'd most poor He might prouoke the wealth of princes. What prince's wanton'st pride e'er could Wash with syluer, wipe with gold? Who is that King, but He Who calls 't His crown, to be call'd thine, That thus can boast to be Waited on by a wandring mine, A voluntary mint, that strowes Warm, syluer showres wher're He goes? O pretious prodigall! Fair spend-thrift of thy-self! thy measure Mercilesse loue! is all. All places, times, and obiects be Thy teares' sweet opportunity. Does the day-starre rise? Still thy teares doe fall and fall. Does Day close his eyes? Still the fountain weeps for all. Let Night or Day doe what they will, Thou hast thy task: thou weepest still. Does thy song lull the air? Thy falling teares keep faithfull time. Does thy sweet-breath'd praire Vp in clouds of incense climb? Still at each sigh, that is, each stop, A bead, that is, a tear, does drop. At these thy weeping gates Watching their watry motion , Each winged moment waits: Takes his tear, and gets him gone. By thine ey's tinct enobled thus, Time layes him vp; he's pretious. Time, as by thee He passes, Makes thy ever-watry eyes His hower-glasses. By them His steps He rectifies. The sands He us'd, no longer please, For His owne sands Hee'l use thy seas. Not, 'so long she liued,' Shall thy tomb report of thee; But, 'so long she grieued:' Thus must we date thy memory. Others by moments, months, and yeares Measure their ages; thou, by teares. So doe perfumes expire, So sigh tormented sweets, opprest With proud vnpittying fire. Such teares the suffring rose, that's vext With vngentle flames, does shed, Sweating in a too warm bed. Say, ye bright brothers, The fugitiue sons of those fair eyes, Your fruitfull mothers! What make you here? what hopes can 'tice You to be born? what cause can borrow You from those nests of noble sorrow? Whither away so fast? Your sweetnes cannot tast, Nor does the dust deserve your birth. Sweet, whither hast you then? O say Why you trip so fast away? We goe not to seek The darlings of Aurora's bed, The rose's modest cheek, Nor the violet's humble head. Though the feild's eyes too Weepers be, Because they want such teares as we. Much lesse mean we to trace The fortune of inferior gemmes, Preferr'd to some proud face, Or pertch't vpon fear'd diadems: Crown'd heads are toyes. We goe to meet A worthy object, our Lord's feet. 'I send, I send here my supremest kiss To thee, my silver-footed Thamasis' 'Heaven, of such faire floods as this, Heaven the christall ocean is.' 'Much rather would it tremble heere And leave them both to bee thy teare.' 'Does the Night arise?' 'Does Night loose her eyes?' 'Thy teares' just cadence still keeps time.' 'Thus dost thou melt the yeare Into a weeping motion. Each minute waiteth heere.' 'Others by dayes, by monthes, by yeares.' 'what is't can borrow You from her eyes, swolne wombes of sorrow.' 'No such thing; we goe to meet A worthier object, our Lords feet.' In shade of Death's sad tree Stood dolefull shee. Ah she! now by none other Name to be known, alas, but Sorrow's Mother. Before her eyes, Her's, and the whole World's ioyes, Hanging all torn she sees; and in His woes And paines, her pangs and throes: Each wound of His, from euery part, All, more at home in her one heart. What kind of marble, than, Is that cold man Who can look on and see, Nor keep such noble sorrowes company? Sure eu'en from you My flints some drops are due, To see so many unkind swords contest So fast for one soft brest: While with a faithfull, mutuall floud, Her eyes bleed teares, His wounds weep blood. O costly intercourse Of deaths, and worse Diuided loues. While Son and mother Discourse alternate wounds to one another, Quick deaths that grow And gather, as they come and goe: His nailes write swords in her, which soon her heart Payes back, with more then their own smart. Her swords, still growing with His pain, Turn speares, and straight come home again. She sees her Son, her God, Bow with a load Of borrow'd sins; and swimme In woes that were not made for Him. Ah! hard command Of loue! Here must she stand, Charg'd to look on, and with a stedfast ey See her life dy: Leauing her only so much breath As serues to keep aliue her death. O mother turtle-doue! Soft sourse of loue! That these dry lidds might borrow Somthing from thy full seas of sorrow! O in that brest Of thine the noblest nest Both of Loue's fires and flouds might I recline This hard, cold heart of mine! The chill lump would relent, and proue Soft subject for the seige of Loue. O teach those wounds to bleed In me; me, so to read This book of loues, thus writ In lines of death, my life may coppy it With loyall cares. O let me, here, claim shares! Yeild somthing in thy sad praerogatiue Great queen of greifes , and giue Me, too, my teares; who, though all stone, Think much that thou shouldst mourn alone. Yea, let my life and me Fix here with thee, And at the humble foot Of this fair tree, take our eternall root. At least be in Loue's way; And in these chast warres, while the wing'd wounds flee So fast 'twixt Him and thee, My brest may catch the kisse of some kind dart, Though as at second hand, from either heart. O you, your own best darts, Dear, dolefull hearts! Hail! and strike home, and make me see That wounded bosomes their own weapons be. Come wounds! come darts! Nail'd hands! and peirced hearts! Come your whole selues, Sorrow's great Son and mother! Nor grudge a yonger brother Of greifes his portion, who had all their due One single wound should not haue left for you. Shall I, sett there So deep a share Dear wounds , and onely now In sorrows draw no diuidend with you? O be more wise, If not more soft, mine eyes! Dissolue my dayes and howres. And if thou yet faint soul! desert To bleed with Him, fail not to weep with her. Rich queen, lend some releife; At least an almes of greif To' a heart who by sad right of sin Could proue the whole summe too sure due to him. By all those stings Of Loue, sweet-bitter things, Which these torn hands transcrib'd on thy true heart; O teach mine too the art To study Him so, till we mix Wounds, and become one crucifix. O let me suck the wine So long of this chast Vine, Till drunk of the dear wounds, I be A lost thing to the world, as it to me. O faithfull friend Of me and of my end! Fold vp my life in loue; and lay't beneath My dear Lord's vitall death. Lo, heart, thy hope's whole plea! her pretious breath Pour'd out in prayrs for thee; thy Lord's in death. What bright-soft thing is this, Sweet Mary, thy faire eyes' expence? A moist sparke it is, A watry diamond; from whence The very tearme, I think, was found, The water of a diamond. O, 'tis not a teare: 'Tis a star about to dropp From thine eye, its spheare; The sun will stoope and take it up: Proud will his sister be, to weare This thine eyes' iewell in her eare. O, 'tis a teare, Too true a teare; for no sad eyne, How sad so 'ere, Raine so true a teare, as thine; Each drop leaving a place so deare, Weeps for it self; is its owne teare. Such a pearle as this is, Slipt from Aurora's dewy brest The rose-bud's sweet lipp kisses; And such the rose it self that's vext With ungentle flames, does shed, Sweating in a too warm bed. Such the maiden gem, By the purpling vine put on, Peeps from her parent stem, And blushes on the bridegroom sun; The watry blossome of thy eyne Ripe, will make the richer wine. Faire drop, why quak'st thou so? 'Cause thou streight must lay thy head In the dust? O, no! The dust shall never be thy bed: A pillow for thee will I bring, Stuft with downe of angel's wing. Thus carried up on high For to Heaven thou must goe , Sweetly shalt thou lye, And in soft slumbers bath thy woe, Till the singing orbes awake thee, And one of their bright chorus make thee. There thy selfe shalt bee An eye, but not a weeping one; Yet I doubt of thee, Whether th' had'st rather there have shone An eye of heaven; or still shine here, In the heaven of Marie's eye, a TEARE. Lord, by Thy sweet and sailing sign! Defend us from our foes and Thine. The wakefull Matines hast to sing The unknown sorrows of our King: The Father's Word and Wisdom, made Man for man, by man's betraid; The World's price sett to sale, and by the bold Merchants of Death and Sin, is bought and sold: Of His best freinds yea of Himself forsaken; By His worst foes because He would beseig'd and taken. All hail, fair tree, Whose fruit we be! What song shall raise Thy seemly praise, Who broughtst to light Life out of death, Day out of Night! Lo, we adore Thee, Dread LAMB! and bow thus low before Thee: 'Cause, by the couenant of Thy crosse, Thou hast sau'd at once the whole World's losse. O Lord IESV-CHRIST, Son of the liuing God! interpose, I pray Thee, Thine Own pretious death, Thy crosse and passion, betwixt my soul and Thy iudgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to graunt vnto me Thy grace and mercy; vnto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to Thy Church, peace and concord; to vs sinners, life and glory euerlasting. Who liuest and reignest with the Father, in the vnity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen. Lord, by Thy sweet and sailing sign! Defend vs from our foes and Thine. The early Prime blushes to say She could not rise so soon, as they Call'd Pilat vp; to try if he Could lend them any cruelty. Their hands with lashes arm'd, their toungs with lyes And loathsom spittle, blott those beauteous eyes, The blissfull springs of ioy; from whose all-chearing ray The fair starrs fill their wakefull fires, the sun him- self drinks day. Victorious sign That now dost shine, Transcrib'd aboue Into the land of light and loue; O let vs twine Our rootes with thine, That we may rise Vpon thy wings, and reach the skyes. Lo, we adore Thee, Dread Lamb! and fall Thus low before Thee. 'Cause by the couenant of Thy crosse Thou hast sau'd at once the whole World's losse. O LORD IESV-CHRIST, Son of the liuing God! interpose, I pray Thee, Thine Own pretious death, Thy crosse and passion, betwixt my soul and Thy iudgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to graunt vnto me Thy grace and mercy; vnto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to Thy Church, peace and concord; to vs sinners, life and glory euerlasting. Who liuest and reignest with the Father, in the vnity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen. Lord, by Thy sweet and sauing sign, Defend vs from our foes and Thine. The third hour's deafen'd with the cry Of crucify Him, crucify. So goes the vote nor ask them, why? , But there is witt in wrath, and they will try A hail more cruell then their crucify. For while in sport He weares a spitefull crown The serious showres along His decent Face run sadly down. Christ when He dy'd Deceiu'd the Crosse; And on Death's side Threw all the losse. The captiue World awak't and found The prisoners loose, the iaylor bound. Lo, we adore Thee, Dread LAMB, and fall Thus low before Thee. 'Cause by the couenant of Thy crosse Thou hast sau'd at once the whole World's losse. O Lord IESV-CHRIST, Son of the liuing God! interpose, I pray Thee, Thine Own pretious death, Thy crosse and passion, betwixt my soul and Thy iudgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to graunt vnto me Thy grace and mercy; vnto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to Thy Church, peace and concord; to vs sinners, life and glory everlasting. Who liuest and reignest with the Father, in the vnity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen. Lord, by Thy sweet and sauing sign! Defend vs from our foes and Thine. Now is the noon of Sorrow's night: High in His patience, as their spite, Lo, the faint Lamb, with weary limb Beares that huge tree which must bear Him! That fatall plant, so great of fame For fruit of sorrow and of shame, Shall swell with both, for Him, and mix All woes into one crucifix. Is tortur'd thirst itselfe too sweet a cup? Gall, and more bitter mocks, shall make it vp. Are nailes, blunt pens of superficiall smart? Contempt and scorn can send sure wounds to search the inmost heart. O deare and sweet dispute 'Twixt Death's and Loue's farr different fruit! Different as farr As antidotes and poysons are. By that first fatall tree Both life and liberty Were sold and slain; By this they both look vp, and liue again. Lo, we adore Thee, Dread Lamb! and bow thus low before Thee. 'Cause by the couenant of Thy crosse, Thou hast sau'd the World from certain losse. O Lord IESV-CHRIST, Son of the liuing God! interpose, I pray Thee, Thine Own pretious death, Thy crosse and passion, betwixt my soul and Thy iudgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to graunt vnto me Thy grace and mercy; vnto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to Thy Church, peace and concord; to vs sinners, life and glory euerlasting. Who liuest and reignest with the Father, in the vnity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen. Lord, by Thy sweet and sauing sign, Defend vs from our foes and Thine. The ninth with awfull horror hearkened to those groanes Which taught attention eu'n to rocks and stones. Hear, Father, hear! Thy Lamb at last complaines Of some more painfull thing then all His paines. Then bowes His all-obedient head, and dyes His own lou's and our sins' GREAT SACRIFICE. The sun saw that, and would haue seen no more; The center shook: her vselesse veil th' inglorious Temple tore. O strange, mysterious strife Of open Death and hidden Life! When on the crosse my King did bleed, Life seem'd to dy, Death dy'd indeed. Lo, we adore Thee, Dread Lamb! and fall Thus low before Thee. 'Cause by the couenant of Thy crosse Thou hast sau'd at once the whole World's losse. O Lord Iesv-Christ, Son of the liuing God! interpose, I pray Thee, Thine Own pretious death, Thy crosse and passion, betwixt my soul and Thy iudgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to graunt vnto me Thy grace and mercy; vnto all quick and dead, remission and rest; to Thy Church, peace and concord; to vs sinners, life and glory euerlasting. Who liuest and reignest with the Father, in the vnity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen. Lord, by Thy sweet and sauing sign! Defend vs from our foes and Thine. But there were rocks would not relent at this: Lo, for their own hearts, they rend His; Their deadly hate liues still, and hath A wild reserve of wanton wrath; Superfluous spear! But there's a heart stands by Will look no wounds be lost, no deaths shall dy. Gather now thy Greif's ripe fruit, great mother-maid! O sad, sweet tree! Wofull and ioyfull we Both weep and sing in shade of thee. When the dear nailes did lock And graft into thy gracious stock The hope, the health, The worth, the wealth Of all the ransom'd World, thou hadst the power In that propitious hour To poise each pretious limb, And proue how light the World was, when it weighd with Him. Wide maist thou spred Thine armes, and with thy bright and blissfull head O'relook all Libanus. Thy lofty crown The King Himself is, thou His humble throne, Where yeilding and yet conquering He Prou'd a new path of patient victory: When wondring Death by death was slain, And our Captiuity His captiue ta'ne. Lo, we adore Thee, Dread LAMB! and bow thus low before Thee. 'Cause by the couenant of Thy crosse Thou hast sau'd the World from certain losse. O Lord Iesv-Christ, Son of the liuing, &c. Lord, by Thy sweet and sauing sign! Defend vs from our foes and Thine. The Complin hour comes last, to call Vs to our own lives' funerall. Ah hartlesse task! yet Hope takes head, And liues in Him that here lyes dead. Run, Mary, run! Bring hither all the blest Arabia, for thy royall phoenix' nest; Pour on thy noblest sweets, which, when they touch This sweeter body, shall indeed be such. But must Thy bed, Lord, be a borrow'd graue Who lend'st to all things all the life they haue. O rather vse this heart, thus farr a fitter stone, 'Cause, though a hard and cold one, yet it is Thine own. Amen. O saue vs then, Mercyfull King of men! Since Thou wouldst needs be thus A Saviour, and at such a rate, for vs; Saue vs, O saue vs, Lord. We now will own no shorter wish, nor name a narrower word; Thy blood bids vs be bold, Thy wounds giue vs fair hold, Thy sorrows chide our shame: Thy crosse, Thy nature, and Thy name Aduance our claim, And cry with one accord Saue them, O saue them, Lord! These Houres, and that which houers o're my end, Into Thy hands and hart, Lord, I commend. Take both to Thine account, that I and mine In that hour, and in these, may be all Thine. That as I dedicate my deuoutest breath To make a kind of life for my Lord's death, So from His liuing and life-giuing death, My dying life may draw a new and neuer fleeting breath. Look vp, languisting soul! Lo, where the fair Badge of thy faith calls back thy care, And biddes thee ne're forget Thy life is one long debt Of loue, to Him, Who on this painfull tree Paid back the flesh He took for thee. Lo, how the streames of life, from that full nest Of loues, Thy Lord's too liberall brest, Flow in an amorous floud Of water wedding blood. With these He wash't thy stain, transferred thy smart, And took it home to His own heart. But though great Love, greedy of such sad gain, Vsurpt the portion of thy pain, And from the nailes and spear Turn'd the steel point of fear: Their vse is chang'd, not lost; and now they moue Not stings of wrath, but wounds of loue. Tall tree of life! thy truth makes good What was till now ne're understood, Though the prophetick king Struck lowd his faithfull string: It was thy wood he meant should make the throne For a more than Salomon. Large throne of Loue! royally spred With purple of too rich a red: Thy crime is too much duty; Thy burthen, too much beauty; Glorious or greiuous more? thus to make good Thy costly excellence with thy King's own blood. Euen ballance of both worlds! our world of sin, And that of grace, Heaun-way'd in Him: Vs with our price thou weighed'st; Our price for vs thou payed'st, Soon as the right-hand scale reioyc't to proue How much Death weigh'd more light then Loue. Hail, our alone hope! let thy fair head shoot Aloft, and fill the nations with thy noble fruit: The while our hearts and we Thus graft our selues on thee, Grow thou and they. And be thy fair increase The sinner's pardon and the iust man's peace. Liue, O for euer liue and reign The Lamb Whom His own loue hath slain! And let Thy lost sheep liue to inherit That kingdom which this Crosse did merit. Amen. These variations &c. as between and , deserve record: Mid'st all the darke and knotty snares, Black wit or malice can, or dares, Thy glorious wisedome breaks the nets, And treds with uncontrouled steps; Thy quell'd foes are not onely now Thy triumphs, but Thy trophies too: They both at once Thy conquests bee, And Thy conquests' memorie. Stony amazement makes them stand Wayting on Thy victorious hand, Like statues fixed to the fame Of Thy renoune, and their own shame, As if they onely meant to breath To be the life of their own death. 'Twas time to hold their peace, when they Had ne're another word to say; Yet is their silence unto Thee, The full sound of Thy victorie; Their silence speaks aloud, and is Thy well pronounc'd panegyris. While they speak nothing, they speak all Their share, in Thy memoriall. While they speake nothing, they proclame Thee, with the shrillest trump of Fame. To hold their peace is all the wayes These wretches have to speak Thy praise. For what else is My life? , lo! I bequeath: Expect a sea; My heart shall make it good. The floodgate shall be set wide ope for Him. To drowne the wantonnesse of His wild thirst. Are yett but hopes, weake as my infant yeares. My teares but tender, and My death new-borne. These cradle-torments have their towardnesse. Erst the full stature of a fatall tree. This knife may be the speare's praeludium. O, these wakefull wounds of Thine! Are they mouthes? or are they eyes? Be they mouthes, or be they eyne, Each bleeding part some one supplies. Lo! a mouth! whose full-bloom'd lips At too dear a rate are roses: Lo! a blood-shot eye! that weeps, And many a cruell teare discloses. O, thou that on this foot hast laid Many a kisse, and many a teare; Now thou shalt have all repaid, What soe're thy charges were. This foot hath got a mouth and lips To pay the sweet summe of thy kisses; To pay thy teares, an eye that weeps, Instead of teares, such gems as this is. The difference onely this appeares, Nor can the change offend The debt is paid in ruby-teares Which thou in pearles did'st lend. IIESU, no more! It is full tide: From Thy head and from Thy feet, From Thy hands and from Thy side All the purple riuers meet. What need Thy fair head bear a part In showres, as if Thine eyes had none? What need they help to drown Thy heart, That striues in torrents of it's own? Water'd by the showres they bring, The thornes that Thy blest browe encloses A cruell and a costly spring Conceiue proud hopes of proving roses. Thy restlesse feet now cannot goe For vs and our eternall good, As they were euer wont. What though? They swimme, alas! in their own floud. Thy hand to giue Thou canst not lift; Yet will Thy hand still giuing be. It giues, but O itself's the gift: It giues though bound; though bound 'tis free. But O Thy side, Thy deep-digg'd side! That hath a double Nilus going: Nor euer was the Pharian tide Half so fruitfull, half so flowing. No hair so small, but payes his riuer To this Red Sea of Thy blood; Their little channells can deliuer Somthing to the generall floud. But while I speak, whither are run All the riuers nam'd before? I counted wrong: there is but one; But O that one is one all ore. Rain-swoln riuers may rise proud, Bent all to drown and overflow; But when indeed all's ouerflow'd, They themselues are drowned too. This Thy blood's deluge a dire chance, Dear Lord, to Thee to vs is found A deluge of deliuerance; A deluge least we should be drown'd. lest N'ere wast Thou in a sense so sadly true, The well of liuing waters, Lord, till now. 'From Thy hands and from Thy feet, From Thy head and from Thy side.' I sing the name which none can say But touch't with an interiour ray: The name of our new peace; our good: Our blisse: and supernaturall blood: The name of all our liues and loues. Hearken, and help, ye holy doues! The high-born brood of Day; you bright Candidates of blissefull light, The heirs elect of Loue, whose names belong Vnto the euerlasting life of song; All ye wise sovles, who in the wealthy brest Of this vnbounded name, build your warm nest. Awake, my glory, Sovl if such thou be, And that fair word at all referr to thee , Awake and sing, And be all wing; Bring hither thy whole self; and let me see What of thy parent Heavn yet speakes in thee. O thou art poore Of noble powres, I see, And full of nothing else but empty me: Narrow, and low, and infinitely lesse Then this great morning's mighty busynes. One little world or two Alas will neuer doe; We must haue store. Goe, Sovl, out of thy self, and seek for more. Goe and request Great Natvre for the key of her huge chest Of Heauns, the self-inuoluing sett of sphears Which dull mortality more feeles then heares . Then rouse the nest Of nimble Art, and trauerse round The aiery shop of soul-appeasing sound: And beat a summons in the same All-soueraign name, To warn each seuerall kind And shape of sweetnes, be they such As sigh with supple wind Or answer artfull touch; That they conuene and come away No other note for't, but the name we sing. Wake lvte and harp, and euery sweet-lipp't thing That talkes with tunefull string; Start into life, and leap with me Into a hasty fitt-tun'd harmony. Nor must you think it much T' obey my bolder touch; I haue authority in Love's name to take you, And to the worke of Loue this morning wake you. Wake, in the name Of Him Who neuer sleeps, all things that are, Or, what's the same, Are musicall; Answer my call And come along; Help me to meditate mine immortal song. Come, ye soft ministers of sweet sad mirth, Bring all your houshold stuffe of Heaun on earth; O you, my Soul's most certain wings, Complaining pipes, and prattling strings, Bring all the store Of sweets you haue; and murmur that you haue no more. Come, ne're to part, Come; and come strong, To the conspiracy of our spatious song. Bring all the powres of praise, Your prouinces of well-vnited worlds can raise; Bring all your lvtes and harps of Heavn and Earth; Whatere cooperates to the common mirthe: Vessells of vocall ioyes, Or you, more noble architects of intellectuall noise, Cymballs of Heau'n, or humane sphears, Solliciters of sovles or eares; And when you are come, with all That you can bring or we can call: O may you fix For euer here, and mix Your selues into the long And euerlasting series of a deathlesse song; Mix all your many worlds aboue, And loose them into one of loue. Chear thee my heart! For thou too hast thy part And place in the Great Throng Of this vnbounded all-imbracing song. Powres of my soul, be proud! And speake lowd To all the dear-bought Nations, this redeeming Name, And in the wealth of one rich word, proclaim New similes to Nature. May it be no wrong Blest Heauns, to you and your superiour song, That we, dark sons of dust and sorrow, A while dare borrow The name of your dilights, and our desires, And fitt it to so farr inferior lyres. Our murmurs haue their musick too, Ye mighty Orbes, as well as you; Nor yeilds the noblest nest Of warbling Seraphim to the eares of Loue, A choicer lesson then the ioyfull brest Of a poor panting turtle-doue. And we, low wormes, haue leaue to doe The same bright busynes ye Third Heavens with you. Gentle spirits, doe not complain! We will haue care To keep it fair, And send it back to you again. Come, louely Name! Appeare from forth the bright Regions of peacefull light; Look from Thine Own illustrious home, Fair King of names, and come: Leaue all Thy natiue glories in their gorgeous nest, And giue Thy Self a while the gracious Guest Of humble soules, that seek to find The hidden sweets Which man's heart meets When Thou art Master of the mind. Come louely Name; Life of our hope! Lo, we hold our hearts wide ope! Vnlock Thy cabinet of Day, Dearest Sweet, and come away. Lo, how the thirsty Lands Gasp for Thy golden showres! with long-stretcht hands Lo, how the laboring Earth That hopes to be Leapes at Thy birth! The' attending World, to wait Thy rise, First turn'd to eyes; And then, not knowing what to doe, Turn'd them to teares, and spent them too. Come royall Name! and pay the expence Of all this pretious patience; O come away And kill the death of this delay! O, see so many worlds of barren yeares Melted and measur'd out in seas of teares: O, see the weary liddes of wakefull Hope Love's eastern windowes all wide ope With curtains drawn, To catch the day-break of Thy dawn. O, dawn at last, long-lookt for Day! Take Thine own wings, and come away. Lo, where aloft it comes! It comes, among The conduct of adoring spirits, that throng Like diligent bees, and swarm about it. O, they are wise, And know what sweetes are suck't from out it: It is the hiue, By which they thriue, Where all their hoard of hony lyes. Lo, where it comes, vpon the snowy Dove's Soft back; and brings a bosom big with loues: Welcome to our dark world, Thou womb of Day! Vnfold Thy fair conceptions, and display The birth of our bright ioyes, O Thou compacted Body of blessings: Spirit of soules extracted! O, dissipate Thy spicy powres, Cloud of condensed sweets and break vpon vs In balmy showrs! O, fill our senses, and take from vs all force of so prophane a fallacy, To think ought sweet but that which smells of Thee! Fair, flowry Name, in none but Thee And Thy nectareall fragrancy, Hourly there meetes An vniuersall synod of all sweets; By whom it is defined thus, That no perfume For euer shall presume To passe for odoriferous, But such alone whose sacred pedigree Can proue itself some kin sweet Name! to Thee. Sweet Name, in Thy each syllable A thousand blest Arabias dwell; A thousand hills of frankincense, Mountains of myrrh, and beds of spices And ten thousand paradises, The soul that tasts Thee takes from thence. How many vnknown worlds there are Of comforts, which Thou hast in keeping! How many thousand mercyes there In Pitty's soft lap ly a-sleeping! To awake them, And to take them Home, and lodge them in his heart. O, that it were as it was wont to be! When Thy old freinds of fire, all full of Thee, Fought against frowns with smiles; gaue glorious chase To persecutions; and against the face Of Death and feircest dangers, durst with braue And sober pace, march on to meet A GRAVE. On their bold brests, about the world they bore Thee, And to the teeth of Hell stood vp to teach Thee; In center of their inmost soules, they wore Thee, Little, alas, thought they Who tore the fair brests of Thy freinds, Their fury but made way For Thee, and seru'd them in Thy glorious ends. What did their weapons but with wider pores Inlarge Thy flaming-brested louers, More freely to transpire That impatient fire, The heart that hides Thee hardly couers? What did their weapons but sett wide the doores For Thee? fair, purple doores, of Loue's deuising; The ruby windowes which inricht the East Of Thy so oft-repeated rising! Each wound of theirs was Thy new morning, And reinthron'd Thee in Thy rosy nest, With blush of Thine Own blood Thy day adorning: It was the witt of Loue oreflowd the bounds Of Wrath, and made Thee way through all those wovnds. Wellcome, dear, all-adored Name! For sure there is no knee That knowes not Thee: Or, if there be such sonns of shame, Alas! what will they doe When stubborn rocks shall bow And hills hang down their heaun-saluting heads To seek for humble beds Of dust, where in the bashfull shades of Night Next to their own low Nothing, they may ly, And couch before the dazeling light of Thy dread majesty. They that by Loue's mild dictate now Will not adore Thee, Shall then, with just confusion bow And break before Thee. Happy me! O happy sheepe! Whom my God vouchsafes to keepe; Even my God, even He it is, That points me to these paths of blisse; On Whose pastures cheerefull Spring, All the yeare doth sit and sing, And rejoycing, smiles to see Their green backs weare His liverie: Pleasure sings my soul to rest, Plentie weares me at her brest, Whose sweet temper teaches me Nor wanton, nor in want to be. At my feet, the blubb'ring mountaine Weeping, melts into a fountaine; Whose soft, silver-sweating streames Make high-noon forget his beames: When my wayward breath is flying, He calls home my soul from dying; Strokes and tames my rabid griefe, And does wooe me into life: When my simple weaknes strayes, Tangled in forbidden wayes He my Shepheard is my guide, Hee's before me, on my side, And behind me, He beguiles Craft in all her knottie wiles: He expounds the weary wonder Of my giddy steps, and under Spreads a path, cleare as the day, Where no churlish rub says nay To my joy-conducted feet, Whilst they gladly goe to meet Grace and Peace, to learne new laies, Tun'd to my great Shepheard's praise. Come now all ye terrors sally, Muster forth into the valley, Where triumphant darknesse hovers With a sable wing, that covers Brooding horror. Come, thou Death, Let the damps of thy dull breath Over-shadow even that shade, And make Darknes' selfe afraid; There my feet, even there, shall find Way for a resolved mind. Still my Shepheard, still my God, Thou art with me; still Thy rod, And Thy staffe, whose influence Gives direction, gives defence. At the whisper of Thy word Crown'd abundance spreads my boord: While I feast, my foes doe feed Their ranck malice not their need, So that with the self-same bread They are starv'd and I am fed. How my head in ointment swims! How my cup o'relooks her brims! So, even so still may I move, By the line of Thy deare love; Still may Thy sweet mercy spread A shady arme above my head, About my paths; so shall I find, The faire center of my mind, Thy temple, and those lovely walls Bright ever with a beame, that falls Fresh from the pure glance of Thine eye, There I'le dwell for ever; there Will I find a purer aire To feed my life with, there I'le sup Balme and nectar in my cup; And thence my ripe soule will I breath Warme into the armes of Death. On the proud banks of great Euphrates' flood, There we sate, and there we wept: Our harpes, that now no musick understood, Nodding, on the willowes slept: While unhappy captiv'd wee, Lovely Sion, thought on thee. They, they that snatcht us from our countrie's breast, Would have a song carv'd to their eares In Hebrew numbers, then O cruell jest! When harpes and hearts were drown'd in teares: Come, they cry'd, come sing and play One of Sion's songs to-day. Sing? play? to whom ah! shall we sing or play, If not, Jerusalem, to thee? Ah! thee Jerusalem! ah! sooner may This hand forget the masterie Of Musick's dainty touch, than I The musick of thy memory. Which when I lose, O may at once my tongue Lose this same busie-speaking art, Vnpearch't, her vocall arteries unstrung, No more acquainted with my heart, On my dry pallat's roof to rest A wither'd leaf, an idle guest. No, no, Thy good Sion, alone, must crowne The head of all my hope-nurst joyes. But Edom, cruell thou! thou cryd'st downe, downe Sinke Sion, downe and never rise, Her falling thou did'st urge and thrust, And haste to dash her into dust: Dost laugh? proud Babel's daughter! do, laugh on, Till thy ruine teach thee teares, Even such as these; laugh, till a venging throng Of woes, too late, doe rouze thy feares: Laugh, till thy children's bleeding bones Weepe pretious teares upon the stones. Come, we shepheards, whose blest sight Hath mett Loue's noon in Nature's night; Come, lift we vp our loftyer song And wake the svn that lyes too long. To all our world of well-stoln joy He slept; and dreamt of no such thing. While we found out Heaun's fairer ey And kis't the cradle of our King. Tell him He rises now, too late To show vs ought worth looking at. Tell him we now can show him more Then he e're show'd to mortall sight; Then he himselfe e're saw before, Which to be seen needes not his light. Tell him, Tityrus, where th' hast been, Tell him Thyrsis, what th' hast seen. Gloomy night embrac't the place Where the noble Infant lay. The Babe look't vp and shew'd His face; In spite of darknes, it was day. It was Thy day, Sweet! and did rise Not from the East, but from Thine eyes. It was Thy day, Sweet. Winter chidde aloud, and sent The angry North to wage his warres. The North forgott his feirce intent, And left perfumes in stead of scarres. By those sweet eyes' persuasiue powrs Where he mean't frost, he scatter'd flowrs. By those sweet eyes. We saw Thee in Thy baulmy-nest, Young dawn of our aeternall Day! We saw Thine eyes break from their East And chase the trembling shades away. We saw Thee; and we blest the sight, We saw Thee by Thine Own sweet light. Poor world said I , what wilt thou doe To entertain this starry Stranger? Is this the best thou canst bestow? A cold, and not too cleanly, manger? Contend, the powres of Heau'n and Earth, To fitt a bed for this huge birthe? Contend the powers. Proud world, said I, cease your contest And let the mighty Babe alone. The phaenix builds the phaenix' nest, Lov's architecture is his own. The Babe whose birth embraues this morn, Made His Own bed e're He was born. I saw the curl'd drops, soft and slow, Come houering o're the place's head; Offring their whitest sheets of snow To furnish the fair Infant's bed: Forbear, said I; be not too bold, Your fleece is white but 'tis too cold. Forbear, sayd I. I saw the obsequious Seraphims Their rosy fleece of fire bestow. For well they now can spare their wing, Since Heavn itself lyes here below. Well done, said I; but are you sure Your down so warm, will passe for pure? Well done, sayd I. No, no! your King's not yet to seeke Where to repose His royall head; See, see! how soon His new-bloom'd cheek Twixt's mother's brests is gone to bed. Sweet choise, said we! no way but so Not to ly cold, yet sleep in snow. Sweet choise, said we. We saw Thee in Thy baulmy nest, Bright dawn of our aeternall Day! We saw Thine eyes break from their East And chase the trembling shades away. We saw Thee: and we blest the sight, We saw Thee, by Thine Own sweet light. Wellcome, all wonders in one sight! Aeternity shutt in a span! Heauen in Earth, and God in man! Great, little One! Whose all-embracing birth Lifts Earth to Heauen, stoopes Heau'n to Earth. Wellcome, though not to gold nor silk, To more then Caesar's birth-right is; Two sister-seas of virgin-milk, With many a rarely-temper'd kisse, That breathes at once both maid and mother, Warmes in the one, cooles in the other. Shee sings Thy tears asleep, and dips Her kisses in Thy weeping eye; She spreads the red leaves of Thy lips, That in their buds yet blushing lye; She 'gainst those mother-diamonds, tries The points of her young eagle's eyes. Wellcome, though not to those gay flyes, Guilded i' th' beames of earthly kings; Slippery soules in smiling eyes; But to poor shepheards' home-spun things; Whose wealth's their flock; whose witt, to be Well-read in their simplicity. Yet when young April's husband-showrs Shall blesse the fruitfull Maja's bed, We'l bring the first-born of her flowrs To kisse Thy feet and crown Thy head. To Thee, dread Lamb! Whose loue must keep The shepheards, more then they the sheep. To Thee, meek Majesty! soft King Of simple Graces and sweet Loves: Each of vs his lamb will bring, Each his pair of sylver doues: Till burnt at last in fire of Thy fair eyes, Ourselues become our own best sacrifice. 'who haue seene Daie's King deposed by night's Queene. Come lift we up our lofty song, To wake the sun that sleeps too long.' 'Hee in this our generall joy 'I saw the officious angells bring The downe that their soft breasts did strow: For well they now can spare their wings, When heauen itselfe lies here below. Faire youth said I be not too rough, Thy downe though soft 's not soft enough.' 'The Babe noe sooner 'gan to seeke Where to lay His louely head; But streight His eyes advis'd His cheeke 'Twixt's mother's breasts to goe to bed.' 'Welcome to our wond'ring sight.' 'not to gold' for 'nor to gold:' adopted. 'But to poore shepheards' simple things, That vse not varnish; noe oyl'd arts, But lift cleane hands full of cleare hearts.' Rise, thou best and brightest morning! Rosy with a double red; With thine own blush thy cheeks adorning, And the dear drops this day were shed. All the purple pride, that laces The crimson curtains of thy bed, Guilds thee not with so sweet graces, Nor setts thee in so rich a red. Of all the fair-cheek't flowrs that fill thee, None so fair thy bosom strowes, As this modest maiden lilly Our sins haue sham'd into a rose. Bid thy golden god, the sun, Burnisht in his best beames rise, Put all his red-ey'd rubies on; These rubies shall putt out their eyes. Let him make poor the purple East, Search what the world's close cabinets keep, Rob the rich births of each bright nest That flaming in their fair beds sleep. Let him embraue his own bright tresses With a new morning made of gemmes; And wear, in those his wealthy dresses, Another day of diadems. When he hath done all he may To make himselfe rich in his rise, All will be darknes to the day That breakes from one of these bright eyes. And soon this sweet truth shall appear, Dear Babe, ere many dayes be done; The Morn shall come to meet Thee here, And leaue her own neglected sun. Here are beautyes shall bereaue him Of all his eastern paramours. His Persian louers all shall leaue him, And swear faith to Thy sweeter powres; Nor while they leave him shall they lose the sun, But in Thy fairest eyes find two for one. 'All the purple pride that laces;' 'look, love, what envious streaks Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.' Bright Babe! Whose awfull beautyes make The morn incurr a sweet mistake; For Whom the officious Heauns deuise To disinheritt the sun's rise: Delicately to displace The day, and plant it fairer in Thy face. O Thou born King of loues! Of lights! Look vp, sweet Babe, look vp and see For loue of Thee, Thus farr from home The East is come To seek her self in Thy sweet eyes. We, who strangely went astray, Lost in a bright Meridian night. A darknes made of too much day. Becken'd from farr By Thy fair starr, Lo, at last haue found our way. Lo, we at last haue found the way To Thee, the World's great vniuersal East, The generall and indifferent Day. All-circling point! all-centring sphear! The World's one, round, aeternall year: Whose full and all-vnwrinkled face Nor sinks nor swells with time or place; But euery where and euery while Is one consistent, solid smile: Not vext and tost 'Twixt Spring and frost; Nor by alternate shredds of light, Sordidly shifting hands with shades and Night. O little all! in Thy embrace The World lyes warm, and likes his place; Nor does his full globe fail to be Kist on both his cheeks by Thee. Time is too narrow for Thy year, Nor makes the whole World Thy half-sphear. From him we flee. From him, whom by a more illustrious ly, The blindnes of the World did call the eye. To Him, Who by these mortall clouds hast made Thyself our sun, though Thine Own shade. Farewell, the World's false light! Farewell, the white Bright idol, black idolatry: The dire face of inferior darknes, kis't And courted in the pompus mask of a more specious mist. Farewell, farewell The proud and misplac't gates of Hell, Pertch't in the Morning's way perched. And double-guilded as the doores of Day: The deep hypocrisy of Death and Night More desperately dark, because more bright. Welcome, the World's sure way! Heavn's wholsom ray. Sweet! to our selues, in Thee. The deathles Heir of all Thy Father's day! Decently born! Embosom'd in a much more rosy Morn: The blushes of Thy all-vnblemisht mother. No more that other Aurora shall sett ope Her ruby casements, or hereafter hope From mortall eyes To meet religious welcomes at her rise. We pretious ones! in you haue won A gentler Morn, a iuster sun. His superficiall beames sun-burn't our skin; But left within The Night and Winter still of Death and Sin. Thy softer yet more certaine darts Spare our eyes, but peirce our harts: Therfore with his proud Persian spoiles We court Thy more concerning smiles. Therfore with his disgrace We guild the humble cheek of this chast place; And at Thy feet powr forth his face. The doating Nations now no more Shall any day but Thine adore. Nor much lesse shall they leaue these eyes In whatsoe're more sacred shape Of ram, he-goat, or reuerend ape; Those beauteous rauishers opprest so sore The too-hard-tempted nations. Neuer more By wanton heyfer shall be worn A garland, or a guilded horn: The altar-stall'd ox, fatt Osyris now With his fair sister cow Shall kick the clouds no more; but lean and tame, See His horn'd face, and dy for shame: And Mithra now shall be no name. No longer shall the immodest lust Of adulterous godles dust Fly in the face of Heau'n; as if it were The poor World's fault that He is fair. Nor with peruerse loues and religious rapes Reuenge Thy bountyes in their beauteous shapes; And punish best things worst; because they stood Guilty of being much for them too good. Proud sons of Death! that durst compell Heau'n it self to find them Hell: And by strange witt of madnes wrest From this World's East the other's West. All-idolizing wormes! that thus could crowd And vrge their sun into Thy cloud; Forcing His sometimes eclips'd face to be A long deliquium to the light of Thee. Alas! with how much heauyer shade The shamefac't lamp hung down his head For that one eclipse he made, Then all those he suffered! For this he look't so bigg; and euery morn With a red face confes't his scorn. Or hiding his vex't cheeks in a hir'd mist Kept them from being so vnkindly kis't. It was for this the Day did rise So oft with blubber'd eyes: For this the Evening wept; and we ne're knew But call'd it deaw. This dayly wrong Silenc't the morning-sons, and damp't their song: Nor was't our deafnes, but our sins, that thus Long made th' harmonious orbes all mute to vs. Time has a day in store When this so proudly poor And self-oppressed spark, that has so long By the loue-sick World bin made Not so much their sun as shade: Weary of this glorious wrong From them and from himself shall flee For shelter to the shadow of Thy tree: Proud to haue gain'd this pretious losse And chang'd his false crown for Thy crosse. That dark Day's clear doom shall define Whose is the master Fire, which sun should shine: That sable judgment-seat shall by new lawes Decide and settle the great cause Of controuerted light: And Natur's wrongs rejoyce to doe Thee right. That forfeiture of Noon to Night shall pay All the idolatrous thefts done by this Night of Day; And the great Penitent presse his own pale lipps With an elaborate loue-eclipse: To which the low World's lawes Shall lend no cause, Saue those domestick which He borrowes From our sins and His Own sorrowes. Three sad hours' sackcloth then shall show to vs His penance, as our fault, conspicuous: And He more needfully and nobly proue The Nations' terror now then erst their loue. Their hated loues changd into wholsom feares: The shutting of His eye shall open their's. As by a fair-ey'd fallacy of Day Miss-ledde, before, they lost their way; So shall they, by the seasonable fright Of an vnseasonable Night, Loosing it once again, stumble on true Light: And as before His too-bright eye Was their more blind idolatry; So his officious blindnes now shall be Their black, but faithfull perspectiue of Thee: His new prodigious Night, Their new and admirable light, The supernaturall dawn of Thy pure Day; While wondring they The happy conuerts now of Him Whom they compell'd before to be their sin Shall henceforth see To kisse him only as their rod, Whom they so long courted as God. And their best vse of him they worship't, be To learn of him at last, to worship Thee. It was their weaknes woo'd his beauty; But it shall be Their wisdome now, as well as duty, To injoy his blott; and as a large black letter Vse it to spell Thy beautyes better; And make the Night it self their torch to Thee. By the oblique ambush of this close night Couch't in that conscious shade The right-ey'd Areopagite Shall with a vigorous guesse inuade And catch Thy quick reflex; and sharply see On this dark ground To descant Thee. O prize of the rich Spirit! with what feirce chase Of his strong soul, shall he Leap at thy lofty face, And seize the swift flash, in rebound From this obsequious cloud, Once call'd a sun, Till dearly thus vndone; Till thus triumphantly tam'd O ye two Twinne svnnes! and taught now to negotiate you. Thus shall that reuerend child of Light, By being scholler first of that new Night, Come forth great master of the mystick Day; And teach obscure mankind a more close way By the frugall negatiue light Of a most wise and well-abused Night To read more legible Thine originall ray; And make our darknes serue Thy Day: Maintaining 'twixt Thy World and oures A commerce of contrary powres, A mutuall trade 'Twixt sun and shade, By confederat black and white Borrowing Day and lending Night. Thus we, who when with all the noble powres That at Thy cost are call'd, not vainly, ours: We vow to make braue way Vpwards, and presse on for the pure intelligentiall prey; At least to play The amorous spyes And peep and proffer at Thy sparkling throne; In stead of bringing in the blissfull prize And fastening on Thine eyes: And nothing gain But more ambitious losse at last, of brain; Now by abased liddes shall learn to be Eagles; and shutt our eyes that we may see. Dread Sweet! lo thus At last by vs, The delegated eye of Day Does first his scepter, then himself, in solemne tribute pay. Thus he vndresses His sacred vnshorn tresses; At Thy adored feet, thus he layes down His gorgeous tire Of flame and fire, To which he now has no pretence: For being show'd by this Day's light, how farr He is from sun enough to make Thy starr, His best ambition now is but to be Somthing a brighter shadow, Sweet, of Thee. Or on Heaun's azure forhead high to stand Thy golden index; with a duteous hand Pointing vs home to our own sun The World's and his Hyperion. 'And urge their sun ... 'Not so much their sun as shade 'Mongst those long rowes of crownes that guild your race, These royall sages sue for decent place: The day-break of the Nations; their first ray, When the dark World dawn'd into Christian Day, And smil'd i' th' Babe's bright face; the purpling bud And rosy dawn of the right royall blood; Fair first-fruits of the Lamb! sure kings in this, They took a kingdom while they gaue a kisse. But the World's homage, scarse in these well blown, We read in you rare queen ripe and full-grown. For from this day's rich seed of diadems Does rise a radiant croppe of royalle stemms, A golden haruest of crown'd heads, that meet And crowd for kisses from the Lamb's white feet: In this illustrious throng, your lofty floud Swells high, fair confluence of all high-born bloud: With your bright head, whole groues of scepters bend Their wealthy tops, and for these feet contend. So swore the Lamb's dread Sire: and so we see't, Crownes, and the heads they kisse, must court these feet. Fix here, fair majesty! May your heart ne're misse To reap new crownes and kingdoms from that kisse; Nor may we misse the ioy to meet in you The aged honors of this day still new. May the great time, in you, still greater be, While all the year is your epiphany; While your each day's deuotion duly brings Three kingdomes to supply this day's three kings. Rise heire of fresh Eternity From thy virgin tombe! Rise mighty Man of wonders, and Thy World with Thee! Thy tombe the uniuersall East, Nature's new wombe, Thy tombe, fair Immortalitie's perfumed nest. Of all the glories make Noone gay, This Rock buds forth the fountaine of the streames of Day; In Joye's white annalls live this howre When Life was borne; No cloud scoule on His radiant lids, no tempest lower. Life, by this Light's nativity All creatures have; Death onely by this Daye's just doome is forc't to dye, Nor is Death forc't; for may he ly Thron'd in Thy grave, Death will on this condition be content to dye. Casting the times with their strong signes, Death's master his owne death divines: Strugling for helpe, his best hope is Herod's suspition may heale his. Therefore he sends a fiend to wake The sleeping tyrant's fond mistake; foolish Who feares in vaine that He Whose birth Meanes Heav'n, should meddle with his Earth. Muse, now the servant of soft loves no more, Hate is thy theame, and Herod, whose unblest Hand O what dares not jealous greatnesse? tore A thousand sweet babes from their mothers' brest: The bloomes of martyrdome. O be a dore Of language to my infant lips, yee best Of confessours: whose throates answering his swords, Gave forth your blood for breath, spoke soules for words. Great Anthony! Spain's well-beseeming pride, Thou mighty branch of emperours and kings; The beauties of whose dawne what eye may bide? Which with the sun himselfe weigh's equall wings; Mappe of heroick worth! whom farre and wide To the beleeving world, Fame boldly sings: Deigne thou to weare this humble wreath, that bowes To be the sacred honour of thy browes. Nor needs my Muse a blush, or these bright flowers Other than what their owne blest beauties bring: They were the smiling sons of those sweet bowers That drink the deaw of life, whose deathlesse spring, Nor Sirian flame nor Borean frost deflowers: From whence heav'n-labouring bees with busie wing, Suck hidden sweets, which well-digested proves Immortall hony for the hive of loves. Thou, whose strong hand with so transcendent worth, Holds high the reine of faire Parthenope, That neither Rome nor Athens can bring forth A name in noble deeds rivall to thee! Thy fame's full noise, makes proud the patient Earth, Farre more then, matter for my Muse and mee. The Tyrrhene Seas and shores sound all the same And in their murmurs keepe thy mighty name. Below the bottome of the great Abysse, There where one center reconciles all things: The World's profound heart pants; there placed is Mischiefe's old master. Close about him clings A curl'd knot of embracing snakes, that kisse His correspondent cheekes: these loathsome strings Hold the perverse prince in eternall ties Fast bound, since first he forfeited the skies. The judge of torments and the king of teares, He fills a burnisht throne of quenchlesse fire: And for his old faire roabes of light, he weares A gloomy mantle of darke flames; the tire That crownes his hated head on high appeares: Where seav'n tall hornes his empire's pride aspire. And to make up Hell's majesty, each horne Seav'n crested Hydras, horribly adorne. His eyes, the sullen dens of Death and Night, Startle the dull ayre with a dismall red: Such his fell glances, as the fatall light Of staring comets, that looke kingdomes dead. From his black nostrills, and blew lips, in spight Of Hell's owne stinke, a worser stench is spread. His breath Hell's lightning is: and each deepe groane Disdaines to think that Heav'n thunders alone. His flaming eyes' dire exhalation, Vnto a dreadfull pile gives fiery breath; Whose unconsum'd consumption preys upon The never-dying life of a long death. In this sad house of slow destruction, His shop of flames hee fryes himself, beneath A masse of woes; his teeth for torment gnash, While his steele sides sound with his tayle's strong lash. Three rigourous virgins waiting still behind, Assist the throne of th' iron-sceptred king. With whips of thornes and knotty vipers twin'd They rouse him, when his ranke thoughts need a sting. Their lockes are beds of uncomb'd snakes that wind About their shady browes in wanton rings. Thus reignes the wrathfull king, and while he reignes, His scepter and himselfe both he disdaines. Disdainefull wretch! how hath one bold sinne cost Thee all the beauties of thy once bright eyes! How hath one black eclipse cancell'd, and crost The glories that did gild thee in thy rise! Proud morning of a perverse day! how lost Art thou unto thy selfe, thou too selfe-wise Narcissus! foolish Phaeton! who for all Thy high-aym'd hopes, gaind'st but a flaming fall. From Death's sad shades to the life-breathing ayre, This mortall enemy to mankind's good, Lifts his malignant eyes, wasted with care, To become beautifull in humane blood. Where Iordan melts his chrystall, to make faire The fields of Palestine, with so pure a flood, There does he fixe his eyes: and there detect New matter, to make good his great suspect. He calls to mind th' old quarrell, and what sparke Set the contending sons of Heav'n on fire: Oft in his deepe thought he revolves the darke Sibill's divining leaves: he does enquire Into th' old prophesies, trembling to marke How many present prodigies conspire, To crowne their past predictions, both he layes Together, in his pondrous mind both weighs. Heaven's golden-winged herald, late he saw To a poore Galilean virgin sent: How low the bright youth bow'd, and with what awe Immortall flowers to her faire hand present. He saw th' old Hebrewe's wombe, neglect the law Of age and barrennesse, and her babe prevent anticipate His birth by his devotion, who began Betimes to be a saint, before a man. He saw rich nectar-thawes, release the rigour Of th' icy North; from frost-bound Atlas hands, His adamantine fetters fall: green vigour Gladding the Scythian rocks and Libian sands. He saw a vernall smile, sweetly disfigure Winter's sad face, and through the flowry lands Of faire Engaddi, hony-sweating fountaines With manna, milk, and balm, new-broach the mountaines. He saw how in that blest Day-bearing Night, The Heav'n-rebuked shades made hast away; How bright a dawne of angels with new light Amaz'd the midnight world, and made a Day Of which the Morning knew not. Mad with spight He markt how the poore shepheards ran to pay Their simple tribute to the Babe, Whose birth Was the great businesse both of Heav'n and Earth. He saw a threefold Sun, with rich encrease Make proud the ruby portalls of the East. He saw the Temple sacred to sweet Peace, Adore her Prince's birth, flat on her brest. He saw the falling idolls, all confesse A comming Deity: He saw the nest Of pois'nous and unnaturall loves, Earth-nurst, Toucht with the World's true antidote, to burst. He saw Heav'n blossome with a new-borne light, On which, as on a glorious stranger gaz'd The golden eyes of Night: whose beame made bright The way to Beth'lem and as boldly blaz'd, Nor askt leave of the sun by day as night. By whom as Heav'ns illustrious hand-maid rais'd, Three kings or what is more three wise men went Westward to find the World's true orient. Strucke with these great concurrences of things, Symptomes so deadly unto Death and him; Faine would he have forgot what fatall strings Eternally bind each rebellious limbe. He shooke himselfe, and spread his spatious wings: Which like two bosom'd sailes, embrace the dimme Aire, with a dismall shade; but all in vaine: Of sturdy adamant is his strong chaine. While thus Heav'n's highest counsails, by the low Footsteps of their effects, he trac'd too well, He tost his troubled eyes: embers that glow Now with new rage, and wax too hot for Hell: With his foule clawes he fenc'd his furrowed brow, And gave a gastly shreeke, whose horrid yell Ran trembling through the hollow vaults of Night, The while his twisted tayle he gnaw'd for spight. Yet on the other side, faine would he start Above his feares, and thinke it cannot be. He studies Scripture, strives to sound the heart And feele the pulse of every prophecy; He knows but knowes not how, or by what art The Heav'n-expecting ages hope to see A mighty Babe, Whose pure, unspotted birth From a chast virgin wombe, should blesse the Earth. But these vast mysteries his senses smother, And reason for what's faith to him? devoure. How she that is a maid should prove a mother, Yet keepe inviolate her virgin flower; How God's eternall Sonne should be Man's brother, Poseth his proudest intellectuall power. How a pure Spirit should incarnate bee, And Life it selfe weare Death's fraile livery. That the great angell-blinding Light should shrinke His blaze, to shine in a poore shepherd's eye: That the unmeasur'd God so low should sinke, As pris'ner in a few poore rags to lye: That from His mother's brest He milke should drinke, Who feeds with nectar Heav'n's faire family: That a vile manger His low bed should prove, Who in a throne of stars thunders above. That He Whom the sun serves, should faintly peepe Through clouds of infant flesh: that He the old Eternall Word should be a child, and weepe: That He Who made the fire, should feare the cold: That Heav'n's high Majesty His court should keepe In a clay-cottage, by each blast control'd: That Glorie's Self should serve our griefs and feares, And free Eternity, submit to yeares. And further, that the Lawe's eternall Giver Should bleed in His Owne Lawe's obedience: And to the circumcising knife deliver Himselfe, the forfet of His slave's offence: That the unblemisht Lambe, blessed for ever, Should take the marke of sin, and paine of sence. These are the knotty riddles, whose darke doubt Intangles his lost thoughts, past getting out. While new thoughts boyl'd in his enraged brest, His gloomy bosome's darkest character Was in his shady forehead seen exprest: The forehead's shade in Griefe's expression there, Is what in signe of joy among the blest The face's lightning, or a smile is here. Those stings of care that his strong heart opprest, A desperate, Oh mee! drew from his deepe brest. Oh mee! thus bellow'd he Oh mee! what great Portents before mine eyes their powers advance? And serves my purer sight, onely to beat Downe my proud thought, and leave it in a trance? Frowne I: and can great Nature keep her seat? And the gay starrs lead on their golden dance? Can His attempts above still prosp'rous be, Auspicious still, in spight of Hell and me? Hee has my Heaven what would He more? whose bright And radiant scepter this bold hand should beare: And for the never-fading fields of light, My faire inheritance, He confines me here To this darke house of shades, horrour and night, To draw a long-liv'd death, where all my cheere Is the solemnity my sorrow weares, That mankind's torment waits upon my teares. Darke, dusky Man, He needs would single forth, To make the partner of His Owne pure ray: And should we powers of Heav'n, spirits of worth, Bow our bright heads before a king of clay? It shall not be, said I, and clombe the North, Where never wing of angell yet made way: What though I mist my blow? yet I strooke high, And to dare something, is some victory. Is He not satisfied? meanes He to wrest Hell from me too, and sack my territories? Vile humane nature means He not t' invest O my despight! with His divinest glories? And rising with rich spoiles upon His brest With His faire triumphs fill all future stories? Must the bright armes of Heav'n, rebuke these eyes? Mocke me, and dazle my darke mysteries? Art thou not Lucifer? he to whom the droves Of stars that gild the Morne, in charge were given? The nimblest of the lightning-winged loves, The fairest, and the first-borne smile of Heav'n? Looke in what pompe the mistrisse planet moves Rev'rently circled by the lesser seaven: Such, and so rich, the flames that from thine eyes, Opprest the common-people of the skyes. Ah wretch! what bootes thee to cast back thy eyes, Where dawning hope no beame of comfort showes? While the reflection of thy forepast joyes, Renders thee double to thy present woes: Rather make up to thy new miseries, And meet the mischiefe that upon thee growes. If Hell must mourne, Heav'n sure shall sympathize, What force cannot effect, fraud shall devise. And yet whose force feare I? have I so lost My selfe? my strength too with my innocence? Come try who dares, Heav'n, Earth, what ere doth boast A borrowed being, make thy bold defence. Come thy Creator too: What though it cost Me yet a second fall? wee'd try our strengths: Heav'n saw us struggle once; as brave a fight Earth now should see, and tremble at the sight. Thus spoke th' impatient prince, and made a pause: His foule hags rais'd their heads, and clapt their hands, And all the powers of Hell in full applause Flourisht their snakes, and tost their flaming brands. We said the horrid sisters wait thy lawes, Th' obsequious handmaids of thy high commands: Be it thy part, Hell's mighty lord, to lay On us thy dread command, our's to obey. What thy Alecto, what these hands can doe, Thou mad'st bold proofe upon the brow of Heav'n, Nor should'st thou bate in pride, because that now To these thy sooty kingdomes thou art driven. Let Heav'n's Lord chide above lowder than thou In language of His thunder, thou art even With Him below: here thou art lord alone, Boundlesse and absolute: Hell is thine owne. If usuall wit, and strength will doe no good, Vertues of stones, nor herbes: use stronger charmes, Anger and love, best hookes of humane blood. If all faile, wee'l put on our proudest armes, And pouring on Heav'n's face the Sea's huge flood Quench His curl'd fires: wee'l wake with our alarmes Ruine, where e're she sleepes at Nature's feet: And crush the World till His wide corners meet. Reply'd the proud king, O my crowne's defence, Stay of my strong hopes, you of whose brave worth, The frighted stars tooke faint experience, When 'gainst the Thunder's mouth we marched forth: Still you are prodigall of your Love's expence In our great projects, both 'gainst Heav'n and Earth: I thanke you all, but one must single out: Cruelty, she alone shall cure my doubt. Fourth of the cursed knot of hags is shee, Or rather all the other three in one; Hell's shop of slaughter shee do's oversee, And still assist the execution. But chiefly there do's she delight to be, Where Hell's capacious cauldron is set on: And while the black soules boile in their own gore, To hold them down, and looke that none seeth o're. Thrice howl'd the caves of Night, and thrice the sound, Thundring upon the bankes of those black lakes, Rung through the hollow vaults of Hell profound: At last her listning eares the noise o're takes, She lifts her sooty lampes, and looking round, A gen'rall hisse from the whole tire of snakes Rebounding, through Hell's inmost cavernes came, In answer to her formidable name. 'Mongst all the palaces in Hell's command, No one so mercilesse as this of her's. The adamantine doors, for ever stand Impenetrable, both to prai'rs and teares; The walls inexorable steele, no hand Of Time, or teeth of hungry Ruine feares. Their ugly ornaments are the bloody staines Of ragged limbs, torne sculls, and dasht-out braines. There has the purple Vengeance a proud seat Whose ever-brandisht sword is sheath'd in blood: About her Hate, Wrath, Warre and Slaughter sweat; Bathing their hot limbs in life's pretious flood: There rude impetuous Rage do's storme and fret, And there as master of this murd'ring brood, Swinging a huge sith stands impartiall Death: scythe With endlesse businesse almost out of breath. For hangings and for curtaines, all along The walls abominable ornaments! Are tooles of wrath, anvills of torments hung; Fell executioners of foule intents, Nailes, hammers, hatchets sharpe, and halters strong, Swords, speares, with all the fatall instruments Of Sin and Death, twice dipt in the dire staines Of brothers' mutuall blood, and fathers' braines. The tables furnisht with a cursed feast Which Harpyes, with leane Famine feed upon, Vnfill'd for ever. Here among the rest, Inhumane Erisicthon too makes one; Tantalus, Atreus, Progne, here are guests: Wolvish Lycaon here a place hath won. The cup they drinke in is Medusa's scull, Which mixt with gall and blood they quaffe brim-full. The foule queen's most abhorred maids of honour, Medaea, Jezabell, many a meager witch, With Circe, Scylla, stand to wait upon her: But her best huswife's are the Parcae, which Still worke for her, and have their wages from her: They prick a bleeding heart at every stitch. Her cruell cloathes of costly threds they weave, Which short-cut lives of murdred infants leave. The house is hers'd about with a black wood, hearsed Which nods with many a heavy-headed tree: Each flowers a pregnant poyson, try'd and good, Each herbe a plague. The wind's sighes timed bee By a black fount, which weeps into a flood. Through the thick shades obscurely might you see Minotaures, Cyclopses, with a darke drove Of Dragons, Hydraes, Sphinxes, fill the grove. Here Diomed's horses, Phereus' dogs appeare, With the fierce lyons of Therodamas. Busiris has his bloody altar here: Here Sylla his severest prison has: The Lestrigonians here their table reare: Here strong Procrustes plants his bed of brasse: Here cruell Scyron boasts his bloody rockes And hatefull Schinis his so feared oakes. What ever schemes of blood, fantastick Frames Of death, Mezentius or Geryon drew; Phalaris, Ochus, Ezelinus: names Mighty in mischiefe; with dread Nero too; Here are they all, here all the swords or flames Such was the house, so furnisht was the hall, Whence the fourth Fury answer'd Pluto's call. Scarce to this monster could the shady king The horrid summe of his intentions tell; But shee swift as the momentary wing Of lightning, or the words he spoke left Hell. She rose, and with her to our World did bring Pale proofe of her fell presence; th' aire too well With a chang'd countenance witnest the sight, And poore fowles intercepted in their flight. Heav'n saw her rise, and saw Hell in the sight: The fields' faire eyes saw her, and saw no more, But shut their flowry lids for ever: Night And Winter strow her way: yea, such a sore Is she to Nature, that a generall fright, An universal palsie spreading o're The face of things, from her dire eyes had run, Had not her thick snakes hid them from the sun. Now had the Night's companion from her dew, Where all the busie day she close doth ly, With her soft wing wipt from the browes of men Day's sweat; and by a gentle tyranny And sweet oppression, kindly cheating them Of all their cares, tam'd the rebellious eye Of Sorrow, with a soft and downy hand, Sealing all brests in a Lethaean band. When the Erinnys her black pineons spread, And came to Bethlem, where the cruell king Had now retyr'd himselfe, and borrowed His brest a while from Care's unquiet sting; Such as at Thebes' dire feast she shew'd her head, Her sulphur-breathed torches brandishing: Such to the frighted palace now she comes, And with soft feet searches the silent roomes. The scepter, which of old great David swaid; Whose right by David's linage so long worne, lineage Himselfe a stranger to, his owne had made; And from the head of Judah's house quite torne The crowne, for which upon their necks he laid A sad yoake, under which they sigh'd in vaine, And looking on their lost state sigh'd againe. Vp, through the spatious pallace passed she, To where the king's proudly-reposed head If any can be soft to Tyranny And selfe-tormenting sin had a soft bed. She thinkes not fit, such, he her face should see, As it is seene in Hell, and seen with dread. To change her face's stile she doth devise, And in a pale ghost's shape to spare his eyes. Her selfe a while she layes aside, and makes Ready to personate a mortall part. Ioseph, the king's dead brother's shape, she takes: What he by nature was, is she by art. She comes to th' king, and with her cold hand slakes His spirits the sparkes of life and chills his heart, Life's forge; fain'd is her voice, and false too, be Her words: 'sleep'st thou, fond man? sleep'st thou?' said she. So sleeps a pilot, whose poore barke is prest With many a mercylesse o're-mastring wave; For whom as dead the wrathfull winds contest Which of them deep'st shall digge her watry grave. Why dost thou let thy brave soule lye supprest In death-like slumbers, while thy dangers crave A waking eye and hand? looke vp and see The Fates ripe, in their great conspiracy. Know'st thou not how of th' Hebrewes' royall stemme That old dry stocke a despair'd branch is sprung: A most strange Babe! Who here conceal'd by them In a neglected stable lies, among Beasts and base straw: Already is the streame Quite turn'd: th' ingratefull rebells, this their young Master with voyce free as the trumpe of Fame Their new King, and thy Successour proclame. What busy motions, what wild engines stand On tiptoe in their giddy braynes! th' have fire Already in their bosomes, and their hand Already reaches at a sword; they hire Poysons to speed thee; yet through all the Land What one comes to reveale what they conspire? Goe now, make much of these; wage still their wars And bring home on thy brest, more thanklesse scarrs. Why did I spend my life, and spill my blood, That thy firme hand for ever might sustaine A well-pois'd scepter? does it now seeme good Thy brother's blood be spilt, life spent in vaine? 'Gainst thy owne sons and brothers thou hast stood In armes, when lesser cause was to complaine: And now crosse Fates a watch about thee keepe, Can'st thou be carelesse now? now can'st thou sleep? Where art thou man? what cowardly mistake Of thy great selfe, hath stolne king Herod from thee? O call thy selfe home to thy self, wake, wake, And fence the hanging sword Heav'n throws upon thee. Redeeme a worthy wrath, rouse thee, and shake Thy selfe into a shape that may become thee. Be Herod, and thou shalt not misse from mee Immortall stings to thy great thoughts, and thee. So said, her richest snake, which to her wrist For a beseeming bracelet she had ty'd A speciall worme it was as ever kist The foamy lips of Cerberus she apply'd To the king's heart: the snake no sooner hist, But Vertue heard it, and away she hy'd: Dire flames diffuse themselves through every veine: This done, home to her Hell she hy'd amaine. He wakes, and with him ne're to sleepe new feares: His sweat-bedewed bed hath now betraid him To a vast field of thornes; ten thousand speares All pointed in his heart seem'd to invade him: So mighty were th' amazing characters With which his feeling dreame had thus dismay'd him, He his owne fancy-framed foes defies: In rage, My armes, give me my armes, he cryes. As when a pile of food-preparing fire, The breath of artificiall lungs embraves, The caldron-prison'd waters streight conspire And beat the hot brasse with rebellious waves; He murmurs, and rebukes their bold desire; Th' impatient liquor frets, and foames, and raves, Till his o're-flowing pride suppresse the flame Whence all his high spirits and hot courage came. So boyles the fired Herod's blood-swolne brest, Not to be slak't but by a sea of blood: His faithlesse crowne he feeles loose on his crest, Which a false tyrant's head ne're firmely stood. The worme of jealous envy and unrest To which his gnaw'd heart is the growing food, Makes him, impatient of the lingring light, Hate the sweet peace of all-composing Night. A thousand prophecies that talke strange things Had sowne of old these doubts in his deepe brest. And now of late came tributary kings, Bringing him nothing but new feares from th' East, More deepe suspicions, and more deadly stings, With which his feav'rous cares their cold increast. And now his dream Hel's fireband still more bright, Shew'd him his feares, and kill'd him with the sight. No sooner therefore shall the Morning see Night hangs yet heavy on the lids of Day But all the counsellours must summon'd bee, To meet their troubled lord: without delay Heralds and messengers immediately Are sent about, who poasting every way To th' heads and officers of every band, Declare who sends, and what is his command. Why art thou troubled, Herod? what vaine feare Thy blood-revolving brest to rage doth move? Heaven's King, Who doffs Himselfe weak flesh to weare, Comes not to rule in wrath, but serve in love. Nor would He this thy fear'd crown from thee teare, But give thee a better with Himselfe above. Poor jealousie! why should He wish to prey Vpon thy crowne, Who gives His owne away? Make to thy reason, man, and mock thy doubts, Looke how below thy feares their causes are; Thou art a souldier, Herod; send thy scouts, See how Hee's furnish't for so fear'd a warre? What armour does He weare? A few thin clouts. His trumpets? tender cries; His men to dare So much? rude shepheards: what His steeds? alas Poore beasts! a slow oxe and a simple asse. With all the powres my poor heart hath Of humble loue and loyall faith, Thus lowe my hidden life! I bow to Thee Whom too much loue hath bow'd more low for me. Down, down, proud Sense! discourses dy! Keep close, my soul's inquiring ey! Not touch, nor tast, must look for more But each sitt still in his own dore. Your ports are all superfluous here, Saue that which lets in Faith, the eare. Faith is my skill: Faith can beleiue As fast as Loue new lawes can giue. Faith is my force: Faith strength affords To keep pace with those powrfull words. And words more sure, more sweet then they, Loue could not think, Truth could not say. O let Thy wretch find that releife Thou didst afford the faithful theife. Plead for me, Loue! alleage and show That Faith has farther here to goe And lesse to lean on: because than then Though hidd as God, wounds with Thee man: Thomas might touch, none but might see At least the suffring side of Thee; And that too was Thy self which Thee did couer, But here eu'n that's hid too which hides the other. Sweet, consider then, that I Though allow'd nor hand nor eye To reach at Thy lou'd face; nor can Tast Thee God, or touch Thee man, Both yet beleiue; and witnesse Thee My Lord too and my God, as lowd as he. Help, Lord, my faith, my hope increase, And fill my portion in Thy peace: Giue loue for life; nor let my dayes Grow, but in new powres to Thy name and praise. O dear memoriall of that Death Which liues still, and allowes vs breath! Rich, royall food! Bountyfull bread! Whose vse denyes vs to the dead; Whose vitall gust alone can giue The same leaue both to eat and liue; Liue euer bread of loues, and be My life, my soul, my surer-selfe to mee. O soft self-wounding Pelican! Whose brest weepes balm for wounded man: Ah! this way bend Thy benign floud To a bleeding heart that gaspes for blood. That blood, whose least drops soueraign be To wash my worlds of sins from me. Come Loue! come Lord! and that long day For which I languish, come away. When this dry soul those eyes shall see, And drink the vnseal'd sourse of Thee: When Glory's sun, Faith's shades shall chase, And for Thy veil giue me Thy face. Amen. Rise, royall Sion! rise and sing Thy soul's kind shepheard, thy hart's King. Stretch all thy powres; call if you can Harpes of heaun to hands of man. This soueraign subject sitts aboue The best ambition of thy loue. Lo, the Bread of Life, this day's Triumphant text, prouokes thy prayse: incites The liuing and life-giuing bread To the great twelue distributed; When Life, Himself, at point to dy Of loue, was His Own legacy. Come, Loue! and let vs work a song Lowd and pleasant, sweet and long; Let lippes and hearts lift high the noise Of so iust and solemn ioyes, Which on His white browes this bright day Shall hence for euer bear away. With a new Lamb blesses the board: The aged Pascha pleads not yeares But spyes Loue's dawn, and disappeares. Types yield to truthes; shades shrink away; And their Night dyes into our Day. But lest that dy too, we are bid Euer to doe what He once did: And by a mindfull, mystick breath That we may liue, reuiue His death; With a well-bles't bread and wine, Transsum'd and taught to turn diuine. The Heaun-instructed house of Faith Here a holy dictate hath, That they but lend their form and face; Themselues with reuerence leaue their place, Nature, and name, to be made good, By a nobler bread, more needfull blood. Where Nature's lawes no leaue will giue, Bold Faith takes heart, and dares beleiue In different species: name not things, Himself to me my Saviovr brings; As meat in that, as drink in this, But still in both one Christ He is. The receiuing mouth here makes Nor wound nor breach in what he takes. Let one, or one thovsand be Here diuiders, single he Beares home no lesse, all they no more, Nor leaue they both lesse then before. Though in it self this soverain Feast Be all the same to euery guest, Yet on the same life-meaning Bread The child of death eates himself dead: Nor is't Loue's fault, but Sin's dire skill That thus from Life can death distill. When the blest signes thou broke shalt see Hold but thy faith intire as He Who, howsoe're clad, cannot come Lesse then whole Christ in euery crumme. In broken formes a stable Faith Vntouch't her precious totall hath. So the life-food of angells then Bow'd to the lowly mouths of men! The children's Bread, the Bridegroom's Wine; Not to be cast to dogges, or swine. Lo, the full, finall Sacrifice On which all figures fix't their eyes: The ransom'd Isack, and his ramme; The manna, and the paschal lamb. Iesv Master, iust and true! Our food, and faithfull Shephard too! O by Thy self vouchsafe to keep, As with Thy selfe Thou feed'st Thy sheep. O let that loue which thus makes Thee Mix with our low mortality, Lift our lean soules, and sett vs vp Con-victors of Thine Own full cup, Coheirs of saints. That so all may Drink the same wine; and the same way: Nor change the pastvre, but the place, To feed of Thee, in Thine Own face. Amen. Lo here a little volume, but great book! Feare it not, sweet, It is no hipocrit Much larger in itselfe then in its looke. A nest of new-born sweets; Whose natiue fires disdaining To ly thus folded, and complaining Of these ignoble sheets, Affect more comly bands Fair one from thy kind hands; And confidently look To find the rest Of a rich binding in your brest. It is, in one choise handfull, Heauvn; and all Heaun's royall host; incampt thus small To proue that true, Schooles vse to tell, Ten thousand angels in one point can dwell. It is Loue's great artillery Which here contracts it self, and comes to ly Close-couch't in your white bosom; and from thence As from a snowy fortresse of defence, Against the ghostly foes to take your part, And fortify the hold of your chast heart. It is an armory of light; Let constant vse but keep it bright, You'l find it yields To holy hands and humble hearts More swords and sheilds Then sin hath snares, or Hell hath darts. Only be sure The hands be pure That hold these weapons; and the eyes, Those of turtles, chast and true; Wakefull and wise: Here is a freind shall fight for you; Hold but this book before your heart, Let prayer alone to play his part; But O the heart That studyes this high art Must be a sure house-keeper: And yet no sleeper. Dear soul, be strong! Mercy will come e're long And bring his bosome fraught with blessings, Flowers of neuer-fading graces To make immortall dressings For worthy soules, whose wise embraces Store vp themselues for Him, Who is alone The Spovse of virgins and the virgin's Son. But if the noble Bridegroom, when He come, Shall find the loytering heart from home; Leauing her chast aboad To gadde abroad Among the gay mates of the god of flyes; To take her pleasure, and to play And keep the deuill's holyday; To dance in th' sunshine of some smiling But beguiling Spheare of sweet and sugred lyes; Some slippery pair Of false, perhaps, as fair, Flattering but forswearing, eyes; Doubtlesse some other heart Will gett the start Meanwhile, and stepping in before Will take possession of that sacred store Of hidden sweets and holy ioyes; Words which are not heard with eares Those tumultuous shops of noise Effectuall whispers, whose still voice The soul it selfe more feeles then heares; Amorous languishments; luminous trances; Sights which are not seen with eyes; Spirituall and soul-peircing glances Whose pure and subtil lightning flyes Home to the heart, and setts the house on fire, And melts it down in sweet desire Yet doth not stay To ask the windows' leaue, to passe that way; Delicious deaths; soft exalations Of soul; dear and diuine annihilations; A thousand vnknown rites Of ioyes and rarefy'd delights; A hundred thousand goods, glories, and graces: And many a mystick thing Which the diuine embraces Of the deare Spouse of spirits, with them will bring, For which it is no shame That dull mortality must not know a name. Of all this hidden store Of blessings, and ten thousand more If when He come He find the heart from home Doubtlesse He will vnload Himself some other where, And poure abroad His pretious sweets On the fair soul whom first He meets. O fair, O fortunate! O riche! O dear! O happy and thrice-happy she Deare silver-breasted dove Who ere she be, Whose early loue With winged vowes Makes hast to meet her morning Spouse, And close with His immortall kisses. Happy indeed, who neuer misses To improue that pretious hour, And euery day Seize her sweet prey, All fresh and fragrant as He rises, Dropping with a baulmy showr, A delicious dew of spices; O let the blissfull heart hold it fast Her heaunly arm-full; she shall tast At once ten thousand paradises; She shall haue power To rifle and deflour The rich and roseall spring of those rare sweets Which with a swelling bosome there she meets: Of pure inebriating pleasures. Happy proof! she shal discouer What ioy, what blisse, How many heau'ns at once it is To haue her God become her Lover. Fear it not, sweet, It is no hypocrite, Amongst the rest Of suters that beseige your maiden brest, Why may not I My fortune try And venture to speak one good word, Not for my self, alas! but for my dearer Lord? You have seen allready, in this lower sphear Of froth and bubbles, what to look for here: Say, gentle soul, what can you find But painted shapes, Peacocks and apes; Illustrious flyes, Guilded dunghills, glorious lyes; Goodly surmises And deep disguises, Oathes of water, words of wind? Trvth biddes me say 'tis time you cease to trust Your soul to any son of dust. 'Tis time you listen to a brauer loue, Which from aboue Calls you vp higher And biddes you come And choose your roome Among His own fair sonnes of fire; Where you among The golden throng That watches at His palace doores May passe along, And follow those fair starres of your's; Starrs much too fair and pure to wait vpon The false smiles of a sublunary sun. Sweet, let me prophesy that at last t'will proue Your wary loue Layes vp his purer and more pretious vowes, And meanes them for a farre more worthy Spovse Then this World of lyes can giue ye: Eu'n for Him with Whom nor cost, Nor loue, nor labour can be lost; Him Who neuer will deceiue ye. Let not my Lord, the mighty Louer Of soules, disdain that I discouer The hidden art Of His high stratagem to win your heart: It was His heaunly art Kindly to cross you In your mistaken loue; That, at the next remoue Thence, He might tosse you And strike your troubled heart Home to Himself; to hide it in His brest: The bright ambrosiall nest Of Loue, of life, and euerlasting rest. Happy mystake! That thus shall wake Your wise soul, neuer to be wonne Now with a loue below the sun. Your first choyce failes; O when you choose agen May it not be amongst the sonnes of men. 'O sweet Maria, empress of my love.' No roofes of gold o're riotous tables shining Whole dayes and suns, deuour'd with endlesse dining. No sailes of Tyrian sylk, proud pauements sweeping, Nor iuory couches costlyer slumber keeping; False lights of flairing gemmes; tumultuous ioyes; Halls full of flattering men and frisking boyes; What'ere false showes of short and slippery good Mix the mad sons of men in mutuall blood. But walkes, and vnshorn woods; and soules, iust so Vnforc't and genuine; but not shady tho. Our lodgings hard and homely as our fare, That chast and cheap, as the few clothes we weare. Those, course and negligent, as the naturall lockes Of these loose groues; rough as th' vnpolish't rockes. A hasty portion of praescribed sleep; Obedient slumbers, that can wake and weep, And sing, and sigh, and work, and sleep again; Still rowling a round spear of still-returning pain. Hands full of harty labours; paines that pay And prize themselves: doe much, that more they may, And work for work, not wages; let to-morrow's New drops, wash off the sweat of this daye's sorrows. A long and dayly-dying life, which breaths A respiration of reuiuing deaths. But neither are there those ignoble stings That nip the blossome of the World's best things, And lash Earth-labouring souls.... No cruell guard of diligent cares, that keep Crown'd woes awake, as things too wise for sleep: But reuerent discipline, and religious fear, And soft obedience, find sweet biding here; Silence, and sacred rest; peace, and pure ioyes; Kind loues keep house, ly close, make no noise; And room enough for monarchs, while none swells Beyond the kingdomes of contentfull cells. The self-remembring sovl sweetly recouers Her kindred with the starrs; not basely houers Know you, faire, on what you looke? Divinest love lyes in this booke: Expecting fier from your faire eyes, To kindle this his sacrifice. When your hands untie these strings, Think, yo' have an angell by the wings; One that gladly would be nigh, To waite upon each morning sigh; To flutter in the balmy aire Of your well-perfumed praier; These white plumes of his hee'l lend you, Which every day to Heaven will send you: To take acquaintance of each spheare, And all your smooth-fac'd kindred there. And though HERBERT'S name doe owe These devotions; fairest, know While I thus lay them on the shrine Of your white hand, they are mine. Loue, thou art absolute, sole lord Of life and death. To proue the word Wee'l now appeal to none of all Those thy old souldiers, great and tall, Ripe men of martyrdom, that could reach down With strong armes, their triumphant crown; Such as could with lusty breath Speak lowd into the face of death, Their great Lord's glorious name, to none Of those whose spatious bosomes spread a throne For Love at large to fill; spare blood and sweat: And see him take a priuate seat, Making his mansion in the mild And milky soul of a soft child. Scarse has she learn't to lisp the name Of martyr; yet she thinks it shame Life should so long play with that breath Which spent can buy so braue a death. She neuer vndertook to know What Death with Loue should haue to doe; Nor has she e're yet vnderstood Why to show loue, she should shed blood, Yet though she cannot tell you why She can love, and she can dy. Scarse has she blood enough to make A guilty sword blush for her sake; Yet has she a heart dares hope to proue How much lesse strong is Death then Love. Be Loue but there; let poor six yeares Be pos'd with the maturest feares Man trembles at, you straight shall find Love knowes no nonage, nor the mind; 'Tis love, not yeares or limbs that can Make the martyr, or the man. Love touch't her heart, and lo it beates High, and burnes with such braue heates; Such thirsts to dy, as dares drink vp A thousand cold deaths in one cup. Good reason: for she breathes all fire; Her white brest heaues with strong desire Of what she may with fruitles wishes Seek for amongst her mother's kisses. Since 'tis not to be had at home She'l trauail to a martyrdom. No home for hers confesses she But where she may a martyr be. She'l to the Moores; and trade with them Moors For this vnualued diadem: She'l offer them her dearest breath, With Christ's name in't, in change for death: She'l bargain with them; and will giue Them God; teach them how to liue In Him: or, if they this deny, For Him she'l teach them how to dy: So shall she leaue amongst them sown Her Lord's blood; or at lest her own. least Farewel then, all the World! adieu! Teresa is no more for you. Farewell, all pleasures, sports, and ioyes Never till now esteemed toyes Farewell, what ever deare may bee, Mother's armes or father's knee: Farewell house, and farewell home! She's for the Moores, and martyrdom. Sweet, not so fast! lo thy fair Spouse Whom thou seekst with so swift vowes; Calls thee back, and bidds thee come T'embrace a milder martyrdom. Blest powres forbid, thy tender life Should bleed vpon a barbarous knife: Or some base hand haue power to raze Thy brest's chast cabinet, and vncase A soul kept there so sweet: O no, Wise Heaun will neuer have it so. Thou art Love's victime; and must dy A death more mysticall and high: Into Loue's armes thou shalt let fall A still-suruiuing funerall. His is the dart must make the death Whose stroke shall tast thy hallow'd breath; A dart thrice dip't in that rich flame Which writes thy Spouse's radiant name Vpon the roof of Heau'n, where ay It shines; and with a soueraign ray Beates bright vpon the burning faces Of soules which in that Name's sweet graces Find euerlasting smiles: so rare, So spirituall, pure, and fair Must be th' immortall instrument Vpon whose choice point shall be sent A life so lou'd: and that there be Fitt executioners for thee, The fair'st and first-born sons of fire Blest seraphim, shall leaue their quire, And turn Loue's souldiers, vpon thee To exercise their archerie. O how oft shalt thou complain Of a sweet and subtle pain: Of intolerable ioyes: Of a death, in which who dyes Loues his death, and dyes again And would for euer so be slain. And liues, and dyes; and knowes not why To liue, but that he thus may neuer leaue to dy. How kindly will thy gentle heart Kisse the sweetly-killing dart! And close in his embraces keep Those delicious wounds, that weep Balsom to heal themselves with: thus When these thy deaths, so numerous Shall all at last dy into one, And melt thy soul's sweet mansion; Like a soft lump of incense, hasted By too hott a fire, and wasted Into perfuming clouds, so fast Shalt thou exhale to Heaun at last In a resoluing sigh, and then O what? Ask not the tongues of men; Angells cannot tell; suffice Thy selfe shall feel thine own full ioyes, And hold them fast for euer there. So soon as thou shalt first appear, The moon of maiden starrs, thy white Mistresse, attended by such bright Soules as thy shining self, shall come And in her first rankes make thee room; Where 'mongst her snowy family Immortall wellcomes wait for thee. O what delight, when reueal'd Life shall stand, And teach thy lipps Heaun with His hand; On which thou now maist to thy wishes Heap vp thy consecrated kisses. What ioyes shall seize thy soul, when she, Bending her blessed eyes on Thee, Those second smiles of Heau'n, shall dart Her mild rayes through Thy melting heart. Angels, thy old friends, there shall greet thee Glad at their own home now to meet thee. All thy good workes which went before And waited for thee, at the door, Shall own thee there; and all in one Weaue a constellation Of crowns, with which the King thy Spouse Shall build vp thy triumphant browes. All thy old woes shall now smile on thee, And thy paines sitt bright vpon thee, All thy sorrows here shall shine, All thy svfferings be diuine: Teares shall take comfort, and turn gemms And wrongs repent to diademms. Eu'n thy death shall liue; and new- Dresse the soul that erst he slew. Thy wounds shall blush to such bright scarres As keep account of the Lamb's warres. Those rare workes where thou shalt leaue writt Loue's noble history, with witt Taught thee by none but Him, while here They feed our soules, shall clothe thine there. Each heaunly word, by whose hid flame Our hard hearts shall strike fire, the same Shall flourish on thy browes, and be Both fire to vs and flame to thee; Whose light shall liue bright in thy face By glory, in our hearts by grace. Thou shalt look round about, and see Thousands of crown'd soules throng to be Themselues thy crown: sons of thy vowes The virgin-births with which thy soueraign Spouse Made fruitfull thy fair soul. Goe now And with them all about thee, bow To Him; put on Hee'l say put on My rosy loue that thy rich zone Sparkling with the sacred flames Of thousand soules, whose happy names Heau'n keep vpon thy score: Thy bright Life brought them first to kisse the light, That kindled them to starrs, and so Thou with the Lamb, thy Lord, shalt goe, And whereso'ere He setts His white Stepps, walk with Him those wayes of light, Which who in death would liue to see, Must learn in life to dy like thee. Thus haue I back again to thy bright name Fair floud of holy fires! transfus'd the flame I took from reading thee: 'tis to thy wrong I know, that in my weak and worthlesse song Thou here art sett to shine where thy full day Scarse dawnes. O pardon, if I dare to say Thine own dear bookes are guilty. For from thence I learn't to know that Loue is eloquence. That hopefull maxime gaue me hart to try If, what to other tongues is tun'd so high, Thy praise might not speak English too: forbid By all thy mysteryes that here ly hidde Forbid it, mighty Loue! let no fond hate Of names and wordes, so farr praeiudicate. Souls are not Spaniards too: one freindly floud Of baptism blends them all into a blood. Christ's faith makes but one body of all soules, And Loue's that body's soul; no law controwlls Our free traffique for Heau'n; we may maintaine Peace, sure, with piety, though it come from Spain. What soul so e're, in any language, can Speak Heau'n like her's, is my soul's country-man. O 'tis not Spanish, but 'tis Heau'n she speaks! 'Tis Heau'n that lyes in ambush there, and breaks From thence into the wondring reader's brest; Who feels his warm heart hatcht into a nest Of little eagles and young loues, whose high Flights scorn the lazy dust, and things that dy. There are enow whose draughts as deep as Hell Drink vp all Spain in sack. Let my soul swell With the strong wine of Loue: let others swimme In puddles; we will pledge this seraphim Bowles full of richer blood then blush of grape Was euer guilty of. Change we our shape My soul some drink from men to beasts, O then Drink we till we proue more, not lesse, then men, And turn not beasts but angels. Let the King Me euer into these His cellars bring, Where flowes such wine as we can haue of none But Him Who trod the wine-presse all alone: Wine of youth, life, and the sweet deaths of Loue; Wine of immortall mixture; which can proue Its tincture from the rosy nectar; wine That can exalt weak earth; and so refine Our dust, that at one draught, Mortality May drink it self vp, and forget to dy. Wel-meaning readers! you that come as freinds And catch the pretious name this peice pretends; Make not too much hast to admire That fair-cheek't fallacy of fire. That is a seraphim, they say And this the great Teresia. Readers, be rul'd by me; and make Here a well-plact and wise mistake: You must transpose the picture quite, And spell it wrong to read it right; Read him for her, and her for him, And call the saint the seraphim. Painter, what didst thou vnderstand To put her dart into his hand? See, euen the yeares and size of him Showes this the mother seraphim. This is the mistresse flame; and duteous he Her happy fire-works here, comes down to see. O most poor-spirited of men! Had thy cold pencil kist her pen, Thou couldst not so vnkindly err To show vs this faint shade for her. Why, man, this speakes pure mortall frame; And mockes with female frost Loue's manly flame. One would suspect thou meant'st to paint Some weak, inferiour, woman-saint. But had thy pale-fac't purple took Fire from the burning cheeks of that bright booke, Thou wouldst on her haue heap't vp all That could be found seraphicall; What e're this youth of fire, weares fair, Rosy fingers, radiant hair, Glowing cheek, and glistering wings, All those fair and fragrant things But before all, that fiery dart Had fill'd the hand of this great heart. Doe then, as equall right requires, Since his the blushes be, and her's the fires, Resume and rectify thy rude design, Vndresse thy seraphim into mine; Redeem this iniury of thy art, Giue him the vail, giue her the dart. Giue him the vail; that he may couer The red cheeks of a riuall'd louer. Asham'd that our world now can show Nests of new seraphims here below. Giue her the dart, for it is she Fair youth shootes both thy shaft, and thee; Say, all ye wise and well-peirc't hearts That liue and dy amidst her darts, What is't your tastfull spirits doe proue In that rare life of her, and Loue? Say, and bear witnes. Sends she not A seraphim at euery shott? What magazins of immortall armes there shine! Heaun's great artillery in each loue-spun line. Giue then the dart to her who giues the flame; Giue him the veil, who giues the shame. But if it be the frequent fate Of worst faults to be fortunate; If all's praescription; and proud wrong Hearkens not to an humble song; For all the gallantry of him, Giue me the suffring seraphim. His be the brauery of all those bright things, The glowing cheekes, the glistering wings; The rosy hand, the radiant dart; Leaue her alone the flaming heart. Leaue her that; and thou shalt leaue her Not one loose shaft but Loue's whole quiver. For in Loue's feild was neuer found A nobler weapon then a wovnd. Loue's passiues are his actiu'st part, The wounded is the wounding heart. O heart! the aequall poise of Loue's both parts Bigge alike with wound and darts. Liue in these conquering leaues; liue all the same, And walk through all tongues one triumphant flame. Liue here, great heart; and loue and dy and kill; And bleed and wound; and yeild and conquer still. Let this immortall life wherere it comes Walk in a crowd of loues and martyrdomes. Let mystick deaths wait on't; and wise soules be The loue-slain wittnesses of this life of thee. O sweet incendiary! shew here thy art, Vpon this carcasse of a hard, cold hart; Let all thy scatter'd shafts of light, that play Among the leaues of thy larg books of day. Combin'd against this brest at once break in And take away from me my self and sin; This gratious robbery shall thy bounty be, And my best fortunes such fair spoiles of me. O thou vndanted daughter of desires! By all thy dowr of lights and fires; By all the eagle in thee, all the doue; By all thy liues and deaths of loue; By thy larg draughts of intellectuall day, And by thy thirsts of loue more large then they; By all thy brim-fill'd bowles of feirce desire, By thy last morning's draught of liquid fire; By the full kingdome of that finall kisse That seiz'd thy parting soul, and seal'd thee His; By all the Heau'n thou hast in Him Fair sister of the seraphim! By all of Him we have in thee; Leaue nothing of my self in me. Let me so read thy life, that I Vnto all life of mine may dy. Lord, when the sense of Thy sweet grace Sends vp my soul to seek Thy face, Thy blessed eyes breed such desire, I dy in Loue's delicious fire. O Loue, I am thy sacrifice! Be still triumphant, blessed eyes! Still shine on me, fair suns! that I Still may behold, though still I dy. Though still I dy, I liue again; Still longing so to be still slain; So gainfull is such losse of breath, I dy euen in desire of death. Still liue in me this longing strife Of liuing death and dying life; For while Thou sweetly slayest me Dead to my selfe, I liue in Thee. Hark! she is call'd, the parting houre is come; Take thy farewell, poor World! Heaun must go home. A peice of heau'nly earth; purer and brighter Then the chast starres, whose choise lamps come to light her, Whil'st through the crystall orbes, clearer then they She climbes; and makes a farre more Milkey Way. She's call'd! Hark, how the dear immortall Doue Sighes to His syluer mate, 'Rise vp, my loue'! Rise vp, my fair, my spotlesse one! The Winter's past, the rain is gone; The Spring is come, the flowrs appear, No sweets, save thou, are wanting here. Come away, my loue! Come away, my doue! Cast off delay; The court of Heau'n is come To wait vpon thee home; Come, come away! The flowrs appear, Or quickly would, wert thou once here. The Spring is come, or if it stay 'Tis to keep time with thy delay. The rain is gone, except so much as we Detain in needfull teares to weep the want of thee. The Winter's past, Or if he make lesse hast, His answer is, why she does so, If Sommer come not, how can Winter goe? Come away, come away! The shrill winds chide, the waters weep thy stay; The fountains murmur, and each loftyest tree Bowes low'st his leauy top, to look for thee. Come away, my loue! Come away, my doue &c. She's call'd again. And will she goe? When Heau'n bidds come, who can say no? Heau'n calls her, and she must away, Heau'n will not, and she cannot stay. Goe then; goe, gloriovs on the golden wings Of the bright youth of Heau'n, that sings Vnder so sweet a burthen. Goe, Since thy dread Son will haue it so. And while thou goest, our song and we Will, as we may, reach after thee. Hail, holy queen of humble hearts! We in thy prayse will haue our parts. And though thy dearest lookes must now give light To none but the blest heavens, whose bright Beholders, lost in sweet delight, Feed for ever their faire sight With those divinest eyes, which we And our darke world noe more shall see; Though our poore eyes are parted soe, Yet shall our lipps never lett goe Thy gracious name, but to the last Our loving song shall hold it fast. Thy pretious name shall be Thy self to vs; and we With holy care will keep it by vs. We to the last Will hold it fast, And no Assvmption shall deny vs. All the sweetest showres Of our fairest flowres Will we strow vpon it. Though our sweets cannot make It sweeter, they can take Themselues new sweetness from it. Maria, men and angels sing, Maria, mother of our King. Live, rosy princesse, live! and may the bright Crown of a most incomparable light Embrace thy radiant browes. O may the best Of euerlasting ioyes bath thy white brest. Live, our chast loue, the holy mirth Of Heau'n; the humble pride of Earth. Liue, crown of woemen; queen of men; Liue, mistresse of our song. And when Our weak desires haue done their best, Sweet angels come, and sing the rest. Rise, then, immortall maid! Religion, rise! Put on thy self in thine own looks: t' our eyes Be what thy beauties, not our blots, have made thee; Such as ere our dark sinnes to dust betray'd thee Heav'n set thee down new drest; when thy bright birth Shot thee like lightning to th' astonisht Earth. From th' dawn of thy fair eyelids wipe away Dull mists and melancholy clouds: take Day And thine own beams about thee: bring the best Of whatsoe're perfum'd thy Eastern nest. Girt all thy glories to thee: then sit down, Open this book, fair Queen, and take thy crown. These learned leaves shall vindicate to thee Thy holyest, humblest, handmaid, Charitie; She'l dresse thee like thy self, set thee on high Where thou shalt reach all hearts, command each eye. Lo! where I see thy altars wake, and rise From the pale dust of that strange sacrifice Which they themselves were; each one putting on A majestie that may beseem thy throne. The holy youth of Heav'n, whose golden rings Girt round thy awfull altars; with bright wings Fanning thy fair locks, which the World beleeves As much as sees shall with these sacred leaves Trick their tall plumes, and in that garb shall go If not more glorious, more conspicuous tho. By the fair laws of thy firm-pointed pen, God's services no longer shall put on No longer shall our Churches' frighted stones Lie scatter'd like the burnt and martyr'd bones Of dead Devotion; nor faint marbles weep In their sad ruines; nor Religion keep A melancholy mansion in those cold Urns: Like God's sanctuaries they lookt of old; Now seem they Temples consecrate to none, Or to a new god, Desolation. No more the hypocrite shall th' upright be Because he's stiffe, and will confesse no knee: While others bend their knee, no more shalt thou, Disdainfull dust and ashes! bend thy brow; Nor on God's altar cast two scorching eyes, Bak't in hot scorn, for a burnt sacrifice: But for a lambe thy tame and tender heart, New struck by Love, still trembling on his dart; Or for two turtle-doves it shall suffice To bring a pair of meek and humble eyes. This shall from henceforth be the masculine theme Pulpits and pennes shall sweat in; to redeem Vertue to action, that life-feeding flame That keeps Religion warm: not swell a name Of Faith; a mountain-word, made up of aire, With those deare spoils that wont to dresse the fair And fruitfull Charitie's full breasts of old , Turning her out to tremble in the cold. What can the poore hope from us, when we be Uncharitable ev'n to Charitie? Nor shall our zealous ones still have a fling At that most horrible and horned thing, Forsooth the Pope: by which black name they call The Turk, the devil, Furies, Hell and all, And something more. O he is Antichrist: Doubt this, and doubt say they that Christ is Christ: Why, 'tis a point of Faith. What e're it be, I'm sure it is no point of Charitie. In summe, no longer shall our people hope, To be a true Protestant's but to hate the Pope. Hear'st thou, my soul, what serious things Both the Psalm and sybyll sings Of a sure Iudge, from Whose sharp ray The World in flames shall fly away. O that fire! before whose face Heaun and Earth shall find no place. O those eyes! Whose angry light Must be the day of that dread night. O that trump! whose blast shall run An euen round with the circling sun, And vrge the murmuring graues to bring Pale mankind forth to meet his King. When a deep groan from beneath Shall cry, We come, we come, and all The caues of Night answer one call. O that Book! whose leaues so bright Will sett the World in seuere light. O that Iudge! Whose hand, Whose eye None can indure; yet none can fly. Ah then, poor soul, what wilt thou say? And to what patron chuse to pray? When starres themselues shall stagger; and The most firm foot no more then stand. But Thou giu'st leaue dread Lord! that we Take shelter from Thy self, in Thee; And with the wings of Thine Own doue Fly to Thy scepter of soft loue. Dear, remember in that Day Who was the cause Thou cam'st this way. Thy sheep was stray'd; and Thou wouldst be Euen lost Thyself in seeking me. Shall all that labour, all that cost Of loue, and eu'n that losse, be lost? And this lou'd soul, iudg'd worth no lesse Then all that way, and wearyness. Iust mercy then, Thy reckning be With my Price, and not with me; 'Twas pay'd at first with too much pain, To be pay'd twice; or once, in vain. Mercy my Iudge , mercy I cry With blushing cheek and bleeding ey: The conscious colors of my sin Are red without and pale within. O let Thine Own soft bowells pay Thy self; and so discharge that day. If Sin can sigh, Loue can forgiue: O say the word, my soul shall liue. Those mercyes which Thy Mary found, Or who Thy crosse confes't and crown'd; Hope tells my heart, the same loues be Still aliue, and still for me. Though both my prayres and teares combine, Both worthlesse are; for they are mine. But Thou Thy bounteous Self still be; And show Thou art, by sauing me. O when Thy last frown shall proclaim The flocks of goates to folds of flame, And all Thy lost sheep found shall be; Let 'Come ye blessed,' then call me. When the dread ' Ite ' shall diuide Those limbs of death, from Thy left side; Let those life-speaking lipps command That I inheritt Thy right hand. O hear a suppliant heart, all crush't And crumbled into contrite dust. My hope, my fear! my Iudge, my Freind! Take charge of me, and of my end. Lord, what is man? why should he coste Thee So dear? what had his ruin lost Thee? Lord, what is man? that thou hast ouerbought So much a thing of nought? Loue is too kind, I see; and can Make but a simple merchant-man. 'Twas for such sorry merchandise, Bold painters haue putt out his eyes. Alas, sweet Lord, what wer't to Thee If there were no such wormes as we? Heau'n ne're the lesse still Heau'n would be, Should mankind dwell In the deep Hell: What haue his woes to doe with Thee? Let him goe weep O're his own wounds; Seraphims will not sleep Nor spheares let fall their faithfull rounds. Still would the youthfull spirits sing; And still Thy spatious palace ring; Still would those beauteous ministers of light Burn all as bright. And bow their flaming heads before Thee: Still thrones and dominations would adore Thee; Still would those euer-wakefull sons of fire Keep warm Thy prayse Both nights and dayes, And teach Thy lou'd name to their noble lyre. Let froward dust then doe it's kind; And giue it self for sport to the proud wind. Why should a peice of peeuish clay plead shares In the aeternity of Thy old cares? Why shouldst Thou bow Thy awfull brest to see What mine own madnesses haue done with me? Should not the king still keepe his throne Because some desperate fool's vndone? Or will the World's illustrious eyes Weep for euery worm that dyes. Will the gallant sun E're the lesse glorious run? Will he hang down his golden head Or e're the sooner seek his Western bed, Because some foolish fly Growes wanton, and will dy? If I were lost in misery, What was it to Thy pretious blood If my foul heart call'd for a floud? What if my faithlesse soul and I Would needs fall in With guilt and sin; What did the Lamb, that He should dy? What did the Lamb, that He should need, When the wolf sins, Himself to bleed? If my base lust, Bargain'd with Death and well-beseeming dust: Why should the white Lamb's bosom write The purple name Of my sin's shame? Why should His vnstaind brest make good My blushes with His Own heart-blood? O my Saviovr, make me see How dearly Thou hast payd for me, That lost again my life may proue, As then in death, so now in loue. Hail, most high, most humble one! Aboue the world, below thy Son; Whose blush the moon beauteously marres And staines the timerous light of stares. He that made all things, had not done Till He had made Himself thy Son: The whole World's host would be thy guest And board Himself at thy rich brest. O boundles hospitality! The Feast of all things feeds on thee. The first Eue, mother of our Fall, E're she bore any one, slew all. Of her vnkind gift might we haue Th' inheritance of a hasty grave: Quick-burye'd in the wanton tomb Of one forbidden bitt; Had not a better frvit forbidden it. Had not thy healthfull womb The World's new eastern window bin, And giuen vs heau'n again, in giuing Him. Thine was the rosy dawn, that spring the Day Which renders all the starres she stole away. Let then the aged World be wise, and all Proue nobly here vnnaturall; 'Tis gratitude to forgett that other And call the maiden Eue their mother. Yee redeem'd nations farr and near, Applaud your happy selues in her; All you to whom this loue belongs And keep't aliue with lasting songs. Let hearts and lippes speak lowd; and say Hail, door of life: and sourse of Day! The door was shut, the fountain seal'd; Yet Light was seen and Life reueal'd. The door was shut, yet let in day, The fountain seal'd, yet life found way. Glory to Thee, great virgin's Son In bosom of Thy Father's blisse. The same to Thee, sweet Spirit be done; As euer shall be, was, and is. Amen. Hope, whose weak beeing ruin'd is Alike if it succeed or if it misse! Whom ill and good doth equally confound, And both the hornes of Fate's dilemma wound. Vain shadow; that dost vanish quite Both at full noon and perfect night! The starres haue not a possibility Of blessing thee. If thinges then from their end we happy call, 'Tis Hope is the most hopelesse thing of all. Hope, thou bold taster of delight! Who in stead of doing so, deuourst it quite. Thou bringst vs an estate, yet leau'st vs poor By clogging it with legacyes before. The ioyes which we intire should wed Come deflour'd-virgins to our bed. Good fortunes without gain imported be Such mighty custom's paid to thee For ioy, like wine kep't close, doth better tast; If it take air before, his spirits wast. Hope, Fortun's cheating lottery, Where for one prize, an hundred blankes there be. Fond anchor, Hope! who tak'st thine aime so farr That still or short or wide thine arrows are; Thinne empty cloud which th' ey deceiues With shapes that our own fancy giues. A cloud which gilt and painted now appeares But must drop presently in teares: When thy false beames o're reason's light preuail, By ignes fatvi for North starres we sail. Brother of Fear, more gaily clad, The merryer fool o' th' two, yet quite as mad. Sire of Repentance, child of fond desire That blow'st the chymick's and the louer's fire. Still leading them insensibly on With the strong witchcraft of 'anon.' By thee the one does changing nature, through Her endlesse labyrinths pursue; And th' other chases woman; while she goes More wayes and turnes then hunted Nature knowes. Dear Hope! Earth's dowry, and Heaun's debt! The entity of things that are not yet. Subtlest, but surest beeing! thou by whom Our nothing has a definition! Substantiall shade! whose sweet allay Blends both the noones of Night and Day: Fates cannot find out a capacity Of hurting thee. From thee their lean dilemma, with blunt horn, Shrinkes, as the sick moon from the wholsome morn. Rich hope! Loue's legacy, vnder lock Of Faith! still spending, and still growing stock! Our crown-land lyes aboue, yet each meal brings A seemly portion for the sonnes of kings. Nor will the virgin ioyes we wed Come lesse vnbroken to our bed, Because that from the bridall cheek of Blisse Thou steal'st vs down a distant kisse. Hope's chast stealth harmes no more Ioye's maidenhead Then spousal rites preiudge the marriage bed. Fair hope! Our earlyer Heau'n! by thee Young Time is taster to Eternity: Thy generous wine with age growes strong, not sowre, Nor does it kill thy fruit, to smell thy flowre. Thy golden, growing head neuer hangs down Till in the lappe of Loue's full noone It falls; and dyes! O no, it melts away As doth the dawn into the Day: As lumpes of sugar loose themselues, and twine Their subtile essence with the soul of wine. Fortune? alas, aboue the World's low warres Hope walks; and kickes the curld heads of conspiring starres. Her keel cutts not the waues where these winds stirr, Fortune's whole lottery is one blank to her. Her shafts and shee, fly farre above, And forage in the fields of light and love. Sweet Hope! kind cheat! fair fallacy! by thee We are not where nor what we be, But what and where we would be. Thus art thou Our absent presence, and our future now. Faith's sister! nurse of fair desire! Fear's antidote! a wise and well-stay'd fire! Temper 'twixt chill Despair, and torrid Ioy! Queen regent in yonge Loue's minority! Though the vext chymick vainly chases His fugitiue gold through all her faces; Though Loue's more feirce, more fruitlesse, fires assay: One face more fugitiue then all they; True Hope's a glorious huntresse, and her chase, The God of Nature in the feilds of grace. And is He gone, Whom these armes held but now? Their hope, their vow! Did euer greife and joy in one poore heart Soe soone change part? Hee's gone! The fair'st flower that e're bosome drest; My soule's sweet rest. My wombe's chast pride is gone, my heauen-borne boy; And where is joy? Hee's gone! and His lou'd steppes to wait vpon, My joy, is gone. My joyes, and Hee are gone; my greife, and I Alone must ly. Hee's gone! not leaving with me, till He come, One smile at home. Oh come then, bring Thy mother her lost joy: Oh come, sweet boy! Make hast, and come, or e're my greife and I Make hast, and dy. Peace, heart! The heauens are angry, all their spheres Rivall thy teares. I was mistaken, some faire sphere or other Was Thy blest mother. What but the fairest heauen, could owne the birth Of soe faire earth? Yet sure Thou did'st lodge heere: this wombe of mine Was once call'd Thine! Oft haue these armes Thy cradle envied, Beguil'd Thy bed. Oft to Thy easy eares hath this shrill tongue Trembled, and sung. Oft haue I wrapt Thy slumbers in soft aires, And stroak't Thy cares. Oft hath this hand those silken casements kept, While their sunnes slept. Oft haue my hungry kisses made Thine eyes Too early rise. Oft haue I spoild my kisses' daintiest diet, To spare Thy quiet. Oft from this breast to Thine, my loue-tost heart Hath leapt, to part. Oft my lost soule haue I bin glad to seeke On Thy soft cheeke. Oft haue these armes alas! show'd to these eyes Their now lost joyes. Dawne then to me, Thou morne of mine owne day, And lett heauen stay. Oh, would'st Thou heere still fixe Thy faire abode, My bosome God: What hinders, but my bosome still might be Thy heauen to Thee? Come braue soldjers, come and see Mighty Loue's artillery. This was the conquering dart; and loe There shines His quiuer, there His bow. These the passiue weapons are, That made great Loue, a man of warre. The quiver that He bore, did bide Soe neare, it prov'd His very side: In it there sate but one sole dart, A peircing one His peirced heart. His weapons were nor steele, nor brasse, The weapon that He wore, He was. For bow His vnbent hand did serue, Well strung with many a broken nerue. Strange the quiver, bow and dart! A bloody side, and hand, and heart! But now the feild is wonne; and they The dust of Warre cleane wip'd away The weapons now of triumph be, That were before of Victorie. I sing Impiety beyond a name: Who stiles it any thinge, knowes not the same. Dull, sluggish Ile! what more than lethargy Gripes thy cold limbes soe fast, thou canst not fly, And start from of thy center? hath Heauen's loue Stuft thee soe full with blisse, thou can'st not moue? If soe, oh Neptune, may she farre be throwne By thy kind armes to a kind world vnknowne: Lett her surviue this day, once mock her fate, And shee's an island truely fortunate. Lett not my suppliant breath raise a rude storme To wrack my suite: O keepe Pitty warme In thy cold breast, and yearely on this day Mine eyes a tributary streame shall pay. Dos't thou not see an exhalation Belch'd from the sulph'ry lungs of Phlegeton? A living comet, whose pestiferous breath Adulterates the virgin aire? with death It laboures: stif'led Nature's in a swound, Ready to dropp into a chaos, round About horror's displai'd; It doth portend, That earth a shoure of stones to heauen shall send, And crack the christall globe; the milkly streame Shall in a siluer raine runne out, whose creame Shall choake the gaping earth, wch then shall fry In flames, & of a burning feuer dy. That wonders may in fashion be, not rare, A Winter's thunder with a groane shall scare, And rouze the sleepy ashes of the dead, Making them skip out of their dusty bed. Those twinckling eyes of heauen, wch eu'n now shin'd, Shall with one flash of lightning be struck blind. The sea shall change his youthfull greene, & slide Along the shore in a graue purple tide. It does praesage, that a great Prince shall climbe, And gett a starry throne before his time. To vsher in this shoale of prodigies, Thy infants, Aeolus, will not suffice. Noe, noe, a giant wind, that will not spare To tosse poore men like dust into the aire; Justle downe mountaines: Kings courts shall be sent, Like bandied balles, into the firmament. Atlas shall be tript vpp, Ioue's gate shall feele The weighty rudenes of his boysterous heele. All this it threats, & more: Horror, that flies To th' empyraeum of all miseries. Most tall hyperbole's cannot descry it; Mischeife, that scornes expression should come nigh it. All this it only threats: the meteor ly'd; It was exhal'd, a while it hung, & dy'd. Heauen kickt the monster downe: downe it was throwne, The fall of all things it praesag'd, its oune It quite forgott: the fearfull earth gaue way, And durst not touch it, heere it made noe stay. At last it stopt at Pluto's gloomy porch; He streightway lighted vpp his pitchy torch. Now to those toiling soules it giues its light, Wch had the happines to worke ith' night. They banne the blaze, & curse its curtesy, For lighting them vnto their misery. Till now Hell was imperfect; it did need Some rare choice torture; now 'tis Hell indeed. Then glutt thy dire lampe with the warmest blood, That runnes in violett pipes: none other food It can digest, then watch the wildfire well, Least it breake forth, & burne thy sooty cell. Reach me a quill, pluckt from the flaming wing Of Pluto's Mercury, that I may sing Death to the life. My inke shall be the blood Of Cerberus, or Alecto's viperous brood. Vnmated malice! Oh vnpeer'd despight! Such as the sable pinions of the night Neuer durst hatch before: extracted see The very quintessence of villanie: I feare to name it; least that he, wch heares, Should haue his soule frighted beyond the spheres. Heauen was asham'd, to see our mother Earth Engender with the Night, & teeme a birth Soe foule, one minute's light had it but seene, The fresh face of the morne had blasted beene. Her rosy cheekes you should haue seene noe more Dy'd in vermilion blushes, as before: But in a vaile of clouds mufling her head A solitary life she would haue led. Affrighted Phoebus would haue lost his way, Giving his wanton palfreys leaue to play Olympick games in the' Olympian plaines, His trembling hands loosing the golden raines. The Queene of night gott the greene sicknes then, Sitting soe long at ease in her darke denne, Not daring to peepe forth, least that a stone Should beate her headlong from her jetty throne. Ioue's twinckling tapers, that doe light the world, Had beene puft out, and from their stations hurl'd: Aeol kept in his wrangling sonnes, least they With this grand blast should haue bin blowne away. Amazed Triton, with his shrill alarmes Bad sporting Neptune to pluck in his armes, And leaue embracing of the Isles, least hee Might be an actor in this Tragedy. Nor should wee need thy crisped waues, for wee An Ocean could haue made t' haue drowned thee. Torrents of salt teares from our eyes should runne, And raise a deluge, where the flaming sunne Should coole his fiery wheeles, & neuer sinke Soe low to giue his thirsty stallions drinke; Each soule in sighes had spent its dearest breath, As glad to waite vpon their King in death. Each winged chorister would swan-like sing A mournfull dirge to their deceased king. The painted meddowes would haue laught no more For ioye of their neate coates; but would haue tore Their shaggy locks, their flowry mantles turn'd Into dire sable weeds, & sate, & mourn'd. Each stone had streight a Niobe become, And wept amaine; then rear'd a costly tombe, T' entombe the lab'ring earth. For surely shee Had died just in her deliuery. But when Ioue's winged heralds this espied, Vpp to th' Almighty thunderer they hied, Relating this sad story. Streight way hee The monster crusht, maugre their midwiferie. And may such Pythons neuer liue to see The Light's faire face, but still abortiue bee. Grow plumpe, leane Death; his Holinesse a feast Hath now praepar'd, & you maist be his guest. Come grimme Destruction, & in purple gore Dye seu'n times deeper than they were before Thy scarlet robes: for heere you must not share A common banquett: noe, heere's princely fare. And least thy blood-shott eyes should lead aside This masse of cruelty, to be thy guide Three coleblack sisters, whose long sutty haire, And greisly visages doe fright the aire; When Night beheld them, shame did almost turne Her sable cheekes into a blushing morne, To see some fowler than herselfe these stand, Each holding forth to light the aery brand, Whose purer flames tremble to be soe nigh, And in fell hatred burning, angry dy. Sly, lurking treason is his bosome freind, Whom faint, & palefac't Feare doth still attend. These need noe invitation, onely thou Black dismall Horror, come; make perfect now Th' epitome of Hell: oh lett thy pinions Be a gloomy canopy to Pluto's minions. In this infernall Majesty close shrowd Your selues, you Stygian states; a pitchy clowd Shall hang the roome, & for your tapers bright, Sulphureous flames, snatch'd from aeternall night. But rest, affrighted Muse; thy siluer wings May not row neerer to these dusky rings. Cast back some amorous glances on the cates, That heere are dressing by the hasty Fates, Nay stopp thy clowdy eyes, it is not good, To drowne thy selfe in this pure pearly flood. But since they are for fire-workes, rather proue A phenix, & in chastest flames of loue Offer thy selfe a virgin sacrifice To quench the rage of hellish deities. But dares Destruction eate these candid breasts, The Muses, & the Graces sugred neasts? Dares hungry Death snatch of one cherry lipp? Or thirsty Treason offer once to sippe One dropp of this pure nectar, wch doth flow In azure channells warme through mounts of snow? The roses fresh, conserued from the rage, And cruell ravishing of frosty age, Feare is afraid to tast of: only this, He humbly crau'd to banquett on a kisse. Poore meagre horror streightwaies was amaz'd, And in the stead of feeding stood, & gaz'd. Their appetites were gone at th' uery sight; But yet theire eyes surfett with sweet delight. Only the Pope a stomack still could find; But yett they were not powder'd to his mind. Forth-with each god stept from his starry throne, And snatch'd away the banquett; euery one Convey'd his sweet delicious treasury To the close closet of aeternity: Where they will safely keepe it, from the rude, And rugged touch of Pluto's multitude. Now Westward Sol had spent the richest beams Of Noon's high glory, when hard by the streams Of Tiber, on the sceane of a greene plat, Vnder protection of an oake, there sate A sweet Lute's-master; in whose gentle aires He lost the daye's heat, and his owne hot cares. Close in the covert of the leaves there stood A Nightingale, come from the neighbouring wood: The sweet inhabitant of each glad tree, Their Muse, their Syren harmlesse Syren she! There stood she listning, and did entertaine The musick's soft report, and mold the same In her owne murmures, that what ever mood His curious fingers lent, her voyce made good: The man perceiv'd his rivall, and her art; Dispos'd to give the light-foot lady sport, Awakes his lute, and 'gainst the fight to come Informes it in a sweet praeludium Of closer straines, and ere the warre begin, He lightly skirmishes on every string, Charg'd with a flying touch: and streightway she Carves out her dainty voyce as readily, Into a thousand sweet distinguish'd tones, And reckons up in soft divisions, Quicke volumes of wild notes; to let him know By that shrill taste, she could do something too. His nimble hands' instinct then taught each string A capring cheerefullnesse; and made them sing To their owne dance; now negligently rash He throwes his arme, and with a long drawne dash Blends all together; then distinctly tripps From this to that; then quicke returning skipps And snatches this again, and pauses there. Shee measures every measure, every where Meets art with art; sometimes as if in doubt Not perfect yet, and fearing to be out, Trayles her plaine ditty in one long-spun note, Through the sleeke passage of her open throat, A cleare unwrinckled song; then doth shee point it With tender accents, and severely joynt it By short diminutives, that being rear'd In controverting warbles evenly shar'd, With her sweet selfe shee wrangles. Hee amazed That from so small a channell should be rais'd The torrent of a voyce, whose melody Could melt into such sweet variety, Straines higher yet; that tickled with rare art The tatling strings each breathing in his part Most kindly doe fall out; the grumbling base In surly groans disdaines the treble's grace; The high-perch't treble chirps at this, and chides, Vntill his finger Moderatour hides And closes the sweet quarrell, rowsing all, Hoarce, shrill at once; as when the trumpets call Hot Mars to th' harvest of Death's field, and woo Men's hearts into their hands: this lesson too Shee gives him back, her supple brest thrills out Sharpe aires, and staggers in a warbling doubt Of dallying sweetnesse, hovers o're her skill, And folds in wav'd notes with a trembling bill The plyant series of her slippery song; Then starts shee suddenly into a throng Of short, thicke sobs, whose thundring volleyes float And roule themselves over her lubrick throat In panting murmurs, 'still'd out of her breast, That ever-bubling spring; the sugred nest Of her delicious soule, that there does lye Bathing in streames of liquid melodie; Musick's best seed-plot, whence in ripen'd aires A golden-headed harvest fairely reares His honey-dropping tops, plow'd by her breath, Which there reciprocally laboureth In that sweet soyle; it seemes a holy quire Founded to th' name of great Apollo's lyre, Whose silver-roofe rings with the sprightly notes Of sweet-lipp'd angel-imps, that swill their throats In creame of morning Helicon, and then Preferre soft-anthems to the eares of men, To woo them from their beds, still murmuring That men can sleepe while they their mattens sing: Most divine service whose so early lay, Prevents the eye-lidds of the blushing Day! There you might heare her kindle her soft voyce, In the close murmur of a sparkling noyse, And lay the ground-worke of her hopefull song, Still keeping in the forward streame, so long, Till a sweet whirle-wind striving to get out Heaves her soft bosome, wanders round about, And makes a pretty earthquake in her breast, Till the fledg'd notes at length forsake their nest, Fluttering in wanton shoales, and to the sky Wing'd with their owne wild ecchos, pratling fly. Shee opes the floodgate, and lets loose a tide Of streaming sweetnesse, which in state doth ride On the wav'd backe of every swelling straine, Rising and falling in a pompous traine. And while she thus discharges a shrill peale Of flashing aires; she qualifies their zeale With the coole epode of a graver noat, Thus high, thus low, as if her silver throat Would reach the brazen voyce of War's hoarce bird; Her little soule is ravisht: and so pour'd Into loose extasies, that she is plac't Above her selfe, Musick's Enthusiast. Shame now and anger mixt a double staine In the Musitian's face; yet once againe Mistresse I come; now reach a straine my lute Above her mocke, or be for ever mute; Or tune a song of victory to me, Or to thy selfe, sing thine own obsequie: So said, his hands sprightly as fire, he flings And with a quavering coynesse tasts the strings. The sweet-lip't sisters, musically frighted, Singing their feares, are fearefully delighted, Trembling as when Appolo's golden haires Are fan'd and frizled, in the wanton ayres Of his own breath: which marryed to his lyre Doth tune the spheares, and make Heaven's selfe looke higher. From this to that, from that to this he flyes. Feeles Musick's pulse in all her arteryes; Caught in a net which there Apollo spreads, His fingers struggle with the vocall threads. Following those little rills, he sinkes into A sea of Helicon; his hand does goe Those pathes of sweetnesse which with nectar drop, Softer than that which pants in Hebe's cup. The humourous strings expound his learned touch, By various glosses; now they seeme to grutch, And murmur in a buzzing dinne, then gingle In shrill-tongu'd accents: striving to be single. Every smooth turne, every delicious stroake Gives life to some new grace; thus doth h' invoke Sweetnesse by all her names; thus, bravely thus Fraught with a fury so harmonious The lute's light genius now does proudly rise, Heav'd on the surges of swolne rapsodyes, Whose flourish meteor-like doth curle the aire With flash of high-borne fancyes: here and there Dancing in lofty measures, and anon Creeps on the soft touch of a tender tone; Whose trembling murmurs melting in wild aires Runs to and fro, complaining his sweet cares, Because those pretious mysteryes that dwell In Musick's ravish't soule, he dares not tell, But whisper to the world: thus doe they vary Each string his note, as if they meant to carry Their Master's blest soule snatcht out at his eares By a strong extasy through all the spheares Of Musick's heaven; and seat it there on high In th' empyraeum of pure harmony. At length after so long, so loud a strife Of all the strings, still breathing the best life Of blest variety, attending on His fingers fairest revolution In many a sweet rise, many as sweet a fall A full-mouth'd diapason swallowes all. This done, he lists what she would say to this, And she, although her breath's late exercise Had dealt too roughly with her tender throate, Yet summons all her sweet powers for a noate. Alas! in vaine! for while sweet soule! she tryes To measure all those wild diversities Of chatt'ring strings, by the small size of one Poore simple voyce, rais'd in a naturall tone; She failes, and failing grieves, and grieving dyes. She dyes: and leaves her life the Victor's prise, Falling upon his lute: O, fit to have That liv'd so sweetly dead, so sweet a grave! Nowe had greate Sol ye middle orbe forsooke When as a fidler by a slidinge brooke With shadie bowers was guarded from ye aire And on his fidle plaid away his care. A nightingale hid in the leaues there stood The muse and harmeles Syren of the wood; Shee snatcht ye soundes and with an echo prates: What his hand playde her voice reiterates. Perceavinge how ye listninge bird did sit Ye fidler faine would make some sport with it, And neately stroke ye lute; then she began And through those notes ran glib division; Then with quicke hand he strikes ye tremblinge strings, Now with a skilfull negligence he flings His carelesse armes, then softly playes his part: Then shee begins and answers art with art, And now as if vncertaine how to singe Lengthens her notes and choisest art doth bringe, And interminglinge softer notes with shrill Daintily quavers through her trembling bill. Ye fidler wonders such melodious notes Shold haue proceedinges from soe slender throats; Tryes her againe, then loudly spoke ye.... Sometimes graue were ye tones, sometimes.... Then high, then lowe againe, yn sweetly iarrs Just like a trumpet callinge men to warrs. Thus did ye dainty Philomela doe And with hoarse voice sange an alarme too. The fidler blusht, and al in ragg he went About to breake his conquered instrument, But yet suspectinge lest ambitious shee Shold to the woods warble her victory; Strikes with inimitable blowes And flies through all the strings, now these, now those, Then tryes the notes, labours in each strayne And then expects if shee replyed agayne. The poore harmonious bird now almost dombe, But impatient, to be overcome Calls her sweet strength together all in vayne, For while shee thinkes to imitate each strayne In pure and natiue language, in this strife And dayntie musicke warre shee left her life, And yeldinge to the gladsome conquerour Falls in his fidle: a fit sepulchere. 'When past the middle orbe the parching sun Had downward nearer our horizon run A Lutenist neare Tiber's streames had found Where the eccho did resound. Under a holme a shady bower he made To ease his cares, his severall phancies play'd; The philomell no sooner did the musicke hear But straight-wayes she drew neare. The harmlesse Syren, musicke of the wood, Hid in a leavy-bush, she hearking stood, She ruminates upon the ayers he plaid, And to him answers made. With her shirl voyce doth all his paines requite Lost not one note, but to his play sung right; Well pleased to heare her skil, and envy, he Tryes his variety. And dares her with his severall notes, runs throw Even all the strains his skill could reach unto: A thousand wayes he tryes: she answers all, And for new straynes dares call. He could not touch a string in such a straine, To which she warble and not sung it plaine; His fingers could not reach to greater choice, Then she did with her voyce. The Lutenist admired her narrow throat Could reach so high or fall to any note: But that which he did thinke in her most strange, She instantly could change. Or sharpe or flat, or meane, or quicke, or slow, What ere he plaid, she the like skill would show: And if he inward did his notes recall, She answer made to all. Th' inraged Lutenist, he blusht for shame That he could not this weake corrivall tame: If thou canst answer this I'le breake my lute, And yeild in the dispute. He said no more, but aimes at such a height Of skill, he thought she could not imitate: He shows the utmost cunning of his hand And all he could command. He tryes his strength, his active fingers flye To every string and stop, now low, now high, And higher yet he multiplyes his skill, Then doth his chorus fill. Then he expecting stands to try if she His envy late would yeeld the victory: She would not yeeld, but summons all her force Though tyred out and hoarse. She strives with various strings the lute's bast chest The spirit of man, one narrow throat and chest: Unequal matches, yet she's pleased that she Concludes victoriously. Her spirit was such she would not live to heare The Lutenist bestow on her a jeere, But broken-hearted fall upon the tombe She choose the sweet lute's wombe. The warbling lutes doe yet their triumphs tell With mournfull accents of the philomell, And have usurpt the title ever since, Of harmony the prince. The morall this, by emulation wee May much improve both art and industry, Though she deserve the name of Philomell Yet men must her excell.' All trees, all leavy groves confesse the Spring Their gentlest friend; then, then the lands begin To swell with forward pride, and feed desire To generation; Heaven's Almighty Sire Melts on the bosome of His love, and powres Himselfe into her lap in fruitfull showers. And by a soft insinuation, mixt With Earth's large masse, doth cherish and assist Her weake conceptions. No lone shade but rings With chatring birds' delicious murmurings; Then Venus' mild instinct at set times yields The herds to kindly meetings, then the fields Quick with warme Zephyre's lively breath lay forth Their pregnant bosomes in a fragrant birth. Each body's plump and jucy, all things full Of supple moisture: no coy twig but will Trust his beloved blossome to the sun Growne lusty now : no vine so weake and young That feares the foule-mouth'd Auster or those stormes That the Southwest-wind hurries in his armes, But hasts her forward blossomes, and layes out Freely layes out her leaves: nor doe I doubt But when the world first out of chaos sprang So smil'd the dayes, and so the tenor ran Of their felicity. A Spring was there, An everlasting Spring, the jolly yeare Led round in his great circle; no wind's breath As then did smell of Winter or of Death. When Life's sweet light first shone on beasts, and when From their hard mother Earth, sprang hardy men, When beasts tooke up their lodging in the Wood, Starres in their higher chambers: never cou'd The tender growth of things endure the sence Of such a change, but that the Heav'ns indulgence Kindly supplyes sick Nature, and doth mold A sweetly-temper'd meane, nor hot nor cold. I paint so ill, my peece had need to be Painted againe by some good poesie. I write so ill, my slender line is scarce So much as th' picture of a well-lim'd verse: Yet may the love I send be true, though I Send not true picture, nor true poesie. Both which away, I should not need to feare, My love, or feign'd or painted should appeare. Goe now, with some dareing drugg, Baite thy disease, and while they tugg, Thou, to maintaine their cruell strife Spend the deare treasure of thy life: Goe take physicke, doat upon Some big-nam'd composition, The oraculous doctors' mistick bills, Certain hard words made into pills; And what at length shalt get by these? Onely a costlyer disease. Goe poore man, thinke what shall bee Remedie 'gainst thy remedie. That which makes us have no need Of phisick, that's phisick indeed. Heark hither, Reader: would'st thou see Nature her own physician be? Would'st see a man all his own wealth, His own musick, his own health? A man, whose sober soul can tell How to wear her garments well? Her garments, that upon her sit, As garments should do close and fit? A well-clothed soul, that's not opprest Nor choked with what she should be drest? Whose soul's sheath'd in a crystall shrine, Through which all her bright features shine? As when a piece of wanton lawn, A thin aerial vail is drawn, O're Beauty's face; seeming to hide, More sweetly shows the blushing bride: A soul, whose intellectuall beams No mists do mask, no lazie steams? A happie soul, that all the way To Heav'n, hath a Summer's day? Would'st see a man whose well-warm'd bloud Bathes him in a genuine floud? A man, whose tuned humours be A set of rarest harmonie? Would'st see blithe looks, fresh cheeks beguile Age? Would'st see December smile? Would'st see a nest of roses grow In a bed of reverend snow? Warm thoughts, free spirits, flattering Winter's self into a Spring? In summe, would'st see a man that can Live to be old, and still a man? Whose latest, and most leaden houres, Fall with soft wings, stuck with soft flowres; And when Life's sweet fable ends, His soul and bodie part like friends: No quarrels, murmures, no delay: A kisse, a sigh, and so away? This rare one, Reader, would'st thou see, Heark hither: and thyself be he. The smiling Morne had newly wak't the Day, And tipt the mountaines with a tender ray: When on a hill whose high imperious brow Lookes downe, and sees the humble Nile below Licke his proud feet, and haste into the seas Through the great mouth that's nam'd from Hercules A band of men, rough as the armes they wore Look't round, first to the sea, then to the shore. The shore that shewed them, what the sea deny'd, Hope of a prey. There to the maine-land ty'd A ship they saw; no men she had, yet prest Appear'd with other lading, for her brest Deep in the groaning waters wallowed Vp to the third ring: o're the shore was spread Death's purple triumph; on the blushing ground Life's late forsaken houses all lay drown'd In their owne blood's deare deluge: some new dead; Some panting in their yet warme ruines bled, While their affrighted soules, now wing'd for flight Lent them the last flash of her glimmering light. Those yet fresh streames which crawled every where Shew'd that sterne Warre had newly bath'd him there. Nor did the face of this disaster show Markes of a fight alone, but feasting too: A miserable and a monstruous feast, Where hungry Warre had made himself a guest: And comming late had eat up guests and all, Who prov'd the feast to their owne funerall &c. Love is lost, nor can his mother Her little fugitive discover: She seekes, she sighes, but no where spyes him; Love is lost: and thus shee cryes him. O yes! if any happy eye, This roaving wanton shall descry; Let the finder surely know Mine is the wagge; 'tis I that owe The winged wand'rer; and that none May thinke his labour vainely gone, The glad descryer shall not misse, To tast the nectar of a kisse From Venus lipps. But as for him That brings him to me, he shall swim In riper joyes: more shall be his Venus assures him than a kisse. But lest your eye discerning slide, These markes may be your judgement's guide; His skin as with a fiery blushing High-colour'd is; his eyes still flushing With nimble flames; and though his mind Be ne're so curst, his tongue is kind: For never were his words in ought Found the pure issue of his thought. The working bees' soft melting gold, That which their waxen mines enfold, Flow not so sweet as doe the tones Of his tun'd accents; but if once His anger kindle, presently It boyles out into cruelty, And fraud: he makes poor mortalls' hurts The objects of his cruell sports. With dainty curles his froward face Is crown'd about: But O what place, What farthest nooke of lowest Hell Feeles not the strength, the reaching spell Of his small hand? Yet not so small As 'tis powerfull therewithall. Though bare his skin, his mind he covers, And like a saucy bird he hovers With wanton wing, now here, now there, 'Bout men and women, nor will spare Till at length he perching rest, In the closet of their brest. His weapon is a little bow, Yet such a one as Jove knows how Ne're suffred, yet his little arrow, Of Heaven's high'st arches to fall narrow. The gold that on his quiver smiles, Deceives men's feares with flattering wiles. But O -too well my wounds can tell With bitter shafts 'tis sauc't too well. He is all cruell, cruell all, His torch imperious though but small Makes the sunne of flames the sire Worse than sun-burnt in his fire. Wheresoe're you chance to find him Ceaze him, bring him but first bind him Pitty not him, but feare thy selfe Though thou see the crafty elfe, Tell down his silver-drops unto thee: They'r counterfeit, and will undoe thee. With baited smiles if he display His fawning cheeks, looke not that way. If he offer sugred kisses, Start, and say, the serpent hisses. Draw him, drag him, though he pray Wooe, intreat, and crying say Prethee, sweet, now let me go, Here's my quiver, shafts and bow, I'le give thee all, take all; take heed Lest his kindnesse make thee bleed. What e're it be Loue offers, still presume That though it shines, 'tis fire and will consume. This reverend shadow cast that setting sun, Whose glorious course through our horrizon run, Left the dimme face of this dull hemispheare, All one great eye, all drown'd in one great teare. Whose faire, illustrious soule, led his free thought Through Learning's vniverse, and vainly sought Room for her spatious selfe, untill at length Shee found the way home, with an holy strength; Snatch't her self hence to Heaven: fill'd a bright place, 'Mongst those immortall fires, and on the face Of her great Maker fixt her flaming eye, There still to read true, pure divinity. And now that grave aspect hath deign'd to shrinke Into this lesse appearance: If you thinke 'Tis but a dead face, Art doth here bequeath: Looke on the following leaves, and see him breath. Faithlesse and fond Mortality! Who will ever credit thee? Fond, and faithlesse thing! that thus, In our best hopes beguilest us. What a reckoning hast thou made, Of the hopes in him we laid! For life by volumes lengthened, A line or two to speake him dead. For the laurell in his verse, For soe many hoped yeares Of fruit, soe many fruitles teares: For a silver-crowned head A durty pillow in Death's bed. For so deare, so deep a trust, Sad requitall, thus much dust! Now though the blow that snatch him hence, Stopt the mouth of Eloquence: Not us'd to speake but in his breath; Leaving his death vngarnished Therefore, because hee is dead Yet if at least shee not denyes, The sad language of our eyes, Wee are contented: for then this Language none more fluent is. Nothing speakes our griefe so well As to speak nothing. Come then tell Thy mind in teares who e're thou be, That ow'st a name to misery. Eyes are vocall, teares have tongues, And there be words not made with lungs; Sententious showres: O let them fall, Their cadence is rhetoricall. Here's a theame will drinke th' expence, Of all thy watry eloquence. Weepe then! onely be exprest Thus much, 'he's dead:' and weep the rest. A plant of noble stemme, forward and faire, As ever whisper'd to the morning aire, Thriv'd in these happie grounds; the Earth's just pride; Whose rising glories made such haste to hide His head in cloudes, as if in him alone Impatient Nature had taught motion To start from Time, and cheerfully to fly Before, and seize upon Maturity. Thus grew this gratious tree, in whose sweet shade The sunne himselfe oft wisht to sit, and made The morning Muses perch like birds, and sing Among his branches: yea, and vow'd to bring His owne delicious phoenix from the blest Arabia, there to build her virgin nest, To hatch her selfe in; 'mongst his leaves, the Day Fresh from the rosie East, rejoyc't to play; To them shee gave the first and fairest beame That waited on her birth: she gave to them The purest pearles, that wept her evening death; The balmy Zephirus got so sweet a breath By often kissing them. And now begun Glad Time to ripen Expectation: The timorous maiden-blossomes on each bough Peept forth from their first blushes; so that now A thousand ruddy hopes smil'd in each bud, And flatter'd every greedy eye that stood Fixt in delight, as if already there Those rare fruits dangled, whence the golden Yeare His crowne expected: when, O Fate! O Time! That seldome lett'st a blushing youthfull prime Hide his hot beames in shade of silver age, So rare is hoary Vertue the dire rage Of a mad storme these bloomy joyes all tore, Ravisht the maiden blossoms, and downe bore The trunke. Yet in this ground his pretious root Still lives, which when weake Time shall be pour'd out Into Eternity, and circular joyes Dance in an endlesse round, again shall rise The faire son of an ever-youthfull Spring, To be a shade for angels while they sing; Meane while who e're thou art that passest here, O doe thou water it with one kind teare. Death, what dost? O, hold thy blow, What thou dost thou dost not know. Death, thou must not here be cruell, This is Nature's choycest iewell: This is hee, in whose rare frame Nature labour'd for a name: And meant to leave his pretious feature The patterne of a perfect creature. Ioy of Goodnesse, love of Art, Vertue weares him next her heart. Him the Muses love to follow, Him they call their vice-Apollo. Apollo, golden though thou bee, Th' art not fairer than is hee, Nor more lovely lift'st thy head Blushing from thine Easterne bed. The glories of thy youth ne're knew Brighter hopes than his can shew. Why then should it e're be seen That his should fade, while thine is green? And wilt thou O, cruell boast! Put poore Nature to such cost? O, twill undoe our common mother, To be at charge of such another. What? thinke me to no other end Gracious heavens do use to send Earth her best perfection, But to vanish, and be gone? Therefore onely given to day To-morrow to be snatch't away? I've seen indeed the hopefull bud Of a ruddy rose that stood Blushing, to behold the ray Of the new-saluted Day: His tender toppe not fully spread The sweet dash of a shower new shead, Invited him, no more to hide Within himselfe the purple pride Of his forward flower; when lo, While he sweetly 'gan to show His swelling gloryes, Auster spide him, Cruell Auster thither hy'd him, And with the rush of one rude blast, Sham'd not, spitefully to wast All his leaves, so fresh, so sweet, And lay them trembling at his feet. I've seen the Morning's lovely ray Hover o're the new-borne Day, With rosie wings so richly bright, As if she scorn'd to thinke of Night; When a rugged storme, whose scowle Made heaven's radiant face looke foule Call'd for an untimely night, To blot the newly-blossom'd light. But were the rose's blush so rare, Were the Morning's smile so faire, As is he, nor cloud, nor wind, But would be courteous, would be kind. Spare him Death, ah! spare him then, Spare the sweetest among men: And let not Pitty, with her teares Keepe such distance from thine eares. But O, thou wilt not, can'st not spare, Haste hath never time to heare. Therefore if he needs must go, And the Fates will have it so; Softly may he be possest Of his monumentall rest. Safe, thou darke home of the dead, Safe, O hide his loved head: Keepe him close, close in thine armes, Seal'd vpp with a thousand charmes. For Pittie's sake, O, hide him quite From his mother Nature's sight; Lest for griefe his losse may move All her births abortive proue. If ever Pitty were acquainted With sterne Death; if e're he fainted, Or forgot the cruell vigour Of an adamantine rigour; Here, O, here we should have knowne it, Here, or no where, hee'd have showne it. For hee, whose pretious memory Bathes in teares of every eye; Hee, to whom our Sorrow brings All the streames of all her springs; Was so rich in grace, and nature, In all the gifts that blesse a creature; The fresh hopes of his lovely youth Flourish't in so faire a growth; So sweet the temple was, that shrin'd The sacred sweetnesse of his mind; That could the Fates know to relent, Could they know what mercy meant, Or had ever learnt to beare The soft tincture of a teare; Teares would now have flow'd so deepe, As might have taught Griefe how to weepe. Now all their steely operation Would quite have lost the cruell fashion. Sicknesse would have gladly been Sick himselfe to have sav'd him; And his feaver wish'd to prove, Burning onely in his love. Him when Wrath it selfe had seen, Wrath it selfe had lost his spleen. Grim Destruction here amaz'd, In stead of striking, would have gaz'd. Even the iron-pointed pen, That notes the tragick doomes of men, Wet with teares, 'still'd from the eyes Of the flinty Destinies, Would have learn't a softer style, And have been asham'd to spoyle His live's sweet story, by the hast Of a cruell stop, ill plac't. In the darke volume of our fate, Whence each lease of life hath date, Where in sad particulars The totall summe of man appeares, And the short clause of mortall breath, Bound in the period of Death: In all the booke if any where Such a tearme as this, 'Spare here,' Could been found, 'twould have been read, Writ in white letters o're his head: Or close unto his name annext, The faire glosse of a fairer text. In briefe, if any one were free Hee was that one, and onely hee. But he, alas! even hee is dead, And our hope's faire harvest spread In the dust. Pitty, now spend All the teares that Griefe can lend. Sad Mortality may hide In his ashes all her pride; With this inscription o're his head, 'All hope of never dying here is dead.' Passenger, who e're thou art Stay a while, and let thy heart Take acquaintance of this stone, Before thou passest further on. This stone will tell thee, that beneath, Is entomb'd the crime of Death; The ripe endowments of whose mind Left his yeares so much behind, That numbring of his vertues' praise, Death lost the reckoning of his dayes; And believing what they told, Imagin'd him exceeding old. In him Perfection did set forth The strength of her united worth. Him his wisdome's pregnant growth Made so reverend, even in youth, That in the center of his brest Sweet as is the phoenix' nest Every reconciled Grace Had their generall meeting-place. In him Goodnesse joy'd to see Learning learne Humility. The splendor of his birth and blood Was but the glosse of his owne good. The flourish of his sober youth Was the pride of naked truth. In composure of his face, Liv'd a faire, but manly grace. His mouth was Rhetorick's best mold, His tongue the touchstone of her gold. What word so e're his breath kept warme, Was no word now but a charme: For all persuasive Graces thence Suck't their sweetest influence. His vertue that within had root, Could not chuse but shine without. And th' heart-bred lustre of his worth, At each corner peeping forth, Pointed him out in all his wayes, Circled round in his owne rayes: That to his sweetnesse, all men's eyes Were vow'd Love's flaming sacrifice. Him while fresh and fragrant Time Cherisht in his golden prime; E're Hebe's hand had overlaid His smooth cheekes with a downy shade; The rush of Death's unruly wave, Swept him off into his grave. Enough, now if thou canst passe on, For now alas! not in this stone Passenger who e're thou art Is he entomb'd, but in thy heart. To these, whom Death again did wed, This grave's their second marriage-bed; For though the hand of Fate could force 'Twixt sovl and body, a diuorce, It could not sunder man and wife, 'Cause they both liued but one life. Peace, good Reader, Doe not weep. Peace, the louers are asleep. They, sweet turtles, folded ly In the last knott that Loue could ty. And though they ly as they were dead, Their pillow stone, their sheetes of lead; Pillow hard, and sheetes not warm Loue made the bed; they'l take no harm; Let them sleep: let them sleep on, Till this stormy night be gone, And the aeternall morrow dawn; Then the curtaines will be drawn And they wake into a light, Whose Day shall neuer sleepe in Night. Dear reliques of a dislodg'd sovl, whose lack Makes many a mourning paper put on black! O stay a while, ere thou draw in thy head And wind thy self vp close in thy cold bed. Stay but a little while, vntill I call A summon's worthy of thy funerall. Come then, Youth, Beavty, Blood! all ye soft powres, Whose sylken flatteryes swell a few fond howres Into a false aeternity. Come man; Hyperbolized nothing! know thy span; Take thine own measure here, down, down, and bow Before thy self in thine idaea; thou Huge emptynes! contract thy bulke; and shrinke All thy wild circle to a point. O sink Lower and lower yet; till thy leane size Call Heaun to look on thee with narrow eyes. Lesser and lesser yet; till thou begin To show a face, fitt to confesse thy kin, Thy neighbourhood to Nothing! Proud lookes, and lofty eyliddes, here putt on Your selues in your vnfaign'd reflexion; Here, gallant ladyes! this vnpartiall glasse Through all your painting showes you your true face. These death-seal'd lippes are they dare giue the ly To the lowd boasts of poor Mortality; These curtain'd windows, this retired eye Outstares the liddes of larg-look't Tyranny. This posture is the braue one, this that lyes Thus low, stands vp me thinkes thus and defies The World. All-daring dust and ashes! only you Of all interpreters read Nature true. These various readings are worthy of record: Line in is misprinted 'svlken' for 'sylken.' Line , has 'small' for 'lean,' which is inferior. , in the readings here are, 'Thy neighbourhood to nothing I here put on Thy selfe in this unfeign'd reflection.' 'To the proud hopes of poor Mortality.' A Brooke, whose streame so great, so good, Was lov'd, was honour'd, as a flood: Whose bankes the Muses dwelt upon, More than their owne Helicon; Here at length, hath gladly found A quiet passage under ground; Meane while his loved bankes, now dry The Muses with their teares supply. Where art thou Sol, while thus the blind-fold Day Staggers out of the East, loses her way Stumbling on Night? Rouze thee illustrious youth, And let no dull mists choake thy Light's faire growth. Point here thy beames: O glance on yonder flocks, And make their fleeces golden as thy locks. Vnfold thy faire front, and there shall appeare Full glory, flaming in her owne free spheare. Gladnesse shall cloath the Earth, we will instile The face of things, an universall smile. Say to the sullen Morne, thou com'st to court her; And wilt command proud Zephirus to sport her With wanton gales: his balmy breath shall licke The tender drops which tremble on her cheeke; Which rarified, and in a gentle raine On those delicious bankes distill'd againe, Shall rise in a sweet Harvest, which discloses Two ever-blushing bed of new-borne roses. Hee'l fan her bright locks, teaching them to flow, And friske in curl'd maeanders: hee will throw A fragrant breath suckt from the spicy nest O' th' pretious phoenix, warme upon her breast. Hee with a dainty and soft hand will trim And brush her azure mantle, which shall swim In silken volumes; wheresoe're shee'l tread, Bright clouds like golden fleeces shall be spread. Rise then faire blew-ey'd maid! rise and discover Thy silver brow, and meet thy golden lover. See how hee runs, with what a hasty flight, Into thy bosome, bath'd with liquid light. Fly, fly prophane fogs, farre hence fly away, Taint not the pure streames of the springing Day, With your dull influence; it is for you To sit and scoule upon Night's heavy brow, Not on the fresh cheekes of the virgin Morne, Where nought but smiles, and ruddy joyes are worne. Fly then, and doe not thinke with her to stay; Let it suffice, shee'l weare no maske to day. orthographic differences only. 'The grey-eyed Morn smiles on the frowning Night And flecked Darkness like a drunkard reels From forth Day's path and Titan's burning wheels.' ii. . What succour can I hope my Muse shall send Whose drowsinesse hath wrong'd the Muses' friend? What hope, Aurora, to propitiate thee, Vnlesse the Muse sing my apologie? O in that morning of my shame! when I Lay folded up in Sleepe's captivity, How at the sight did'st thou draw back thine eyes, Into thy modest veyle? how didst thou rise Twice dy'd in thine owne blushes! and did'st run To draw the curtaines, and awake the sun! Who, rowzing his illustrious tresses, came, And seeing the loath'd object, hid for shame His head in thy faire bosome, and still hides Mee from his patronage; I pray, he chides: And pointing to dull Morpheus, bids me take My owne Apollo, try if I can make If Morpheus have a Muse to wait on mee. Hence 'tis, my humble fancie finds no wings, No nimble rapture starts to Heaven, and brings Enthusiasticke flames, such as can give Marrow to my plumpe genius, make it live Drest in the glorious madnesse of a Muse, Whose feet can walke the milky way, and chuse Her starry throne; whose holy heats can warme The grave, and hold up an exalted arme To lift me from my lazy vrne, to climbe Vpon the stooped shoulders of old Time, And trace Eternity But all is dead, All these delicious hopes are buried In the deepe wrinckles of his angry brow, Where Mercy cannot find them: but O thou Bright lady of the Morne! pitty doth lye So warme in thy soft brest, it cannot dye. Have mercy then, and when he next shall rise O meet the angry God, invade his eyes, And stroake his radiant cheekes; one timely kisse Will kill his anger, and revive my blisse. So to the treasure of thy pearly deaw, Thrice will I pay three teares, to show how true My griefe is; so my wakefull lay shall knocke At th' orientall gates, and duly mocke The early larkes' shrill orizons, to be An anthem at the Daye's nativitie. And the same rosie-finger'd hand of thine, That shuts Night's dying eyes, shall open mine. But thou, faint God of Sleepe, forget that I Was ever known to be thy votary. No more my pillow shall thine altar be, Nor will I offer any more to thee My selfe a melting sacrifice; I'me borne Againe a fresh child of the buxome Morne, Heire of the sun's first beames. Why threat'st thou so? Why dost thou shake thy leaden scepter? goe, Bestow thy poppy upon wakefull Woe, Sicknesse, and Sorrow, whose pale lidds ne're know Thy downie finger; dwell upon their eyes, Shut in their teares: shut out their miseries. In , line , for 'shall' reads 'will:' ib. in HARLEIAN MS. as Love, brave Vertue's younger brother, Erst hath made my heart a mother; Shee consults the conscious spheares To calculate her young son's yeares. Shee askes, if sad, or saving powers, Gave omen to his infant howers; Shee askes each starre that then stood by, If poore Love shall live or dy. Ah, my heart, is that the way? Are these the beames that rule thy day? Thou know'st a face in whose each looke, Beauty layes ope Love's fortune-booke; On whose faire revolutions wait The obsequious motions of man's fate: Ah, my heart, her eyes, and shee, Have taught thee new astrologie. How e're Love's native houres were set, What ever starry synod met, 'Tis in the mercy of her eye, If poore Love shall live or dye. If those sharpe rayes putting on Points of death, bid Love be gon: Though the Heavens in counsell sate To crowne an uncontrouled fate, Though their best aspects twin'd upon The kindest constellation, Cast amorous glances on his birth, And whisper'd the confederate Earth To pave his pathes with all the good, That warmes the bed of youth and blood Love hath no plea against her eye: Beauty frownes, and Love must dye. But if her milder influence move, And gild the hopes of humble Love: Though Heaven's inauspicious eye Lay blacke on Love's nativitie; Though every diamond in Love's crowne Fixt his forehead to a frowne: Her eye, a strong appeale can giue, Beauty smiles, and Love shall live. O, if Love shall live, O, where But in her eye, or in her eare, In her brest, or in her breath, Shall I hide poore Love from Death? For in the life ought else can give, Love shall dye, although he live. Or, if Love shall dye, O, where But in her eye, or in her eare, In her breath, or in her breast, Shall I build his funerall nest? While Love shall thus entombed lye, Love shall live, although he dye. To thy lover Deere, discover That sweet blush of thine that shameth When those roses It discloses All the flowers that Nature nameth. In free ayre, Flow thy haire; That no more Summer's best dresses, Bee beholden For their golden Locks, to Phoebus' flaming tresses. O deliver Love his quiver; From thy eyes he shoots his arrowes: Cannot follow: Featherd with his mother's sparrowes. O envy not That we dye not Those deere lips whose doore encloses In their places, Brother pearles, and sister roses. From these treasures Of ripe pleasures One bright smile to cleere the weather. Thus made even, Both will be good friends together. The aire does wooe thee, Winds cling to thee; Might a word once fly from out thee, Storme and thunder Would sit under, And keepe silence round about thee. But if Nature's Common creatures, So deare glories dare not borrow: Yet thy beauty Owes a duty, To my loving, lingring sorrow, Death shall send mee All his terrors to affright mee: Thine eyes' Graces Gild their faces, And those terrors shall delight mee. When my dying Life is flying, Those sweet aires that often slew mee Shall revive mee, Or reprive mee, And to many deaths renew mee. Love now no fire hath left him, We two betwixt us have divided it. Your eyes the light hath reft him, The heat commanding in my heart doth sit. O that poore Love be not for ever spoyled, Let my heat to your light be reconciled. So shall these flames, whose worth Now all obscured lyes: Drest in those beames start forth And dance before your eyes. Or else partake my flames I care not whither And so in mutuall names Of Love, burne both together. Would any one the true cause find How Love came nak't, a boy, and blind? 'Tis this: listning one day too long, So th' Syrens in my mistris' song, The extasie of a delight So much o're-mastring all his might, To that one sense, made all else thrall, And so he lost his clothes, eyes, heart and all. Let hoary Time's vast bowels be the grave To what his bowels' birth and being gave; Let Nature die, Phoenix-like from death Revived Nature takes a second breath; If on Time's right hand, sit faire Historie, If from the seed of emptie Ruine, she Can raise so faire an harvest; let her be Ne're so farre distant, yet Chronologie Sharp-sighted as the eagle's eye, that can Out-stare the broad-beam'd daye's meridian Will have a perspicill to find her out, And, through the night of error and dark doubt, Discerne the dawne of Truth's eternall ray, As when the rosie Morne budds into Day. Now that Time's empire might be amply fill'd, Babel's bold artists strive below to build Ruine a temple; on whose fruitfull fall History reares her pyramids, more tall On these she lifts the world; and on their base Showes the two termes, and limits of Time's race: That, the creation is; the judgement, this; That, the World's morning; this, her midnight is. If with distinctive eye, and mind, you looke Vpon the Front, you see more than one Booke. Creation is God's Booke, wherein He writ Each creature, as a letter filling it. History is Creation's Booke; which showes To what effects the Series of it goes. Chronologie's the Booke of Historie, and beares The just account of Dayes, Moneths, and Yeares. But Resurrection, in a later Presse, And New Edition, is the summe of these. The Language of these Bookes had all been one, Had not th' aspiring Tower of Babylon Confus'd the tongues, and in a distance hurl'd As farre the speech, as men, o' th' new fill'd world. Set then your eyes in method, and behold Time's embleme, Saturne; who, when store of gold Coyn'd the first age, devour'd that birth, he fear'd; Till History, Time's eldest child appear'd; And Phoenix-like, in spight of Saturne's rage, Forc'd from her ashes, heyres in every age. From th' Rising Sunne, obtaining by just suit, A Spring's ingender, and an Autumne's fruit. Who in those Volumes at her motion pend, Vnto Creation's Alpha doth extend. Againe ascend, and view Chronology, By optick skill, pulling farre History Neerer; whose Hand the piercing Eagle's eye Strengthens, to bring remotest objects nigh. Vnder whose feet, you see the Setting Sunne, From the darke Gnomon, o're her volumes runne, Drown'd in eternall night, never to rise, Till Resurrection show it to the eyes Of Earth-worne men; and her shrill trumpet's sound Affright the Bones of mortals from the ground. The Columnes both are crown'd with either Sphere, To show Chronology and History beare, No other Culmen than the double Art, Astronomy, Geography, impart. The modest front of this small floore, Beleeve me, Reader, can say more Than many a braver marble can; One whose conscience was a thing, That troubled neither Church nor King. One of those few that in this towne, Honour all Preachers, heare their owne. Sermons he heard, yet not so many As left no time to practise any. He heard them reverendly, and then His practice preach'd them o're agen. His Parlour-Sermons rather were Those to the eye, then to the eare. His prayers took their price and strength, Not from the lowdnesse, nor the length. He was a Protestant at home, Not onely in despight of Rome. He lov'd his Father; yet his zeale Tore not off his Mother's veile. To th' Church he did allow her dresse, True Beauty, to true Holinesse. Peace, which he lov'd in life, did lend Her hand to bring him to his end. When Age and Death call'd for the score, No surfets were to reckon for. Death tore not therefore but sans strife Gently untwin'd his thread of life. What remaines then, but that thou Write these lines, Reader, in thy brow, And by his faire example's light, Burne in thy imitation bright. So while these lines can but bequeath A life perhaps unto his death; His better Epitaph shall bee, His life still kept alive in thee. Come and let us live my deare, Let us love and never feare, What the sowrest fathers say: Brightest Sol that dyes to day Lives againe as blith to morrow; But if we darke sons of sorrow Set: O then how long a Night Shuts the eyes of our short light! Then let amorous kisses dwell On our lips, begin and tell A thousand, and a hundred score, An hundred and a thousand more, Till another thousand smother That, and that wipe of another. Thus at last when we have numbred Many a thousand, many a hundred, Wee'l confound the reckoning quite, And lose our selves in wild delight: While our joyes so multiply, As shall mocke the envious eye. That not impossible she That shall command my heart and me; Lock't up from mortall eye, In shady leaves of Destiny; Of studied Fate stand forth, And teach her faire steps tread our Earth; Idaea, take a shrine Of chrystall flesh, through which to shine; Bespeake her to my blisses, And be ye call'd, my absent kisses. That owes not all its duty To gaudy tire or glistring shoo-ty. Taffata or tissew can, Or rampant feather, or rich fan. Of shop, or silkeworme's toyle, Or a bought blush, or a set smile. By its owne beauty drest, And can alone commend the rest. Out of no other shop Than what Nature's white hand sets ope. And blood, with pen of Truth Write, what their reader sweetly ru'th. More than a morning rose: Which to no boxe his being owes. A lover's kisse may play, Yet carry nothing thence away. Their richest tires, but dresse Themselves in simple nakednesse. The neighbour diamond, and out-face That sunshine, by their own sweet grace. Iewells, but to declare How much themselves more pretious are. Can tame the wanton day Of gems, that in their bright shades play. Or pearle that dares appeare, Be its own blush, be its own teare. For whose more noble smart, Love may be long chusing a dart. Full quivers on Love's bow; Yet pay lesse arrowes than they owe. The blood, yet teach a charme, That Chastity shall take no harme. The burnish of no sin, Nor flames of ought too hot within. Vertue their mistresse, And have no other head to dresse. As the coy bride's, when Night First does the longing lover right. And vaine, as those are shed For a dying maydenhead. No part of their good morrow, From a fore-spent night of sorrow. Of darknesse, by the light Of a cleere mind are day all night. Made short by lovers play, Yet long by th' absence of the day. A challenge to his end, And when it comes say, Welcome friend! Of sweet discourse, whose powers Can crown old Winter's head with flowers. Open sunnes; shady bowers; 'Bove all, nothing within that lowers. Can make Daye's forehead bright, Or give downe to the wings of Night. Haue Nature all the name, Art and ornament the shame. Her counsell her owne vertue be. Of worth may leave her poore Of wishes; and I wish no more. That her, whose radiant browes Weave them a garland of my vowes; My future hopes can raise, A trophie to her present praise. What these lines wish to see: I seeke no further: it is she. Lo I uncloath and cleare, My wishes cloudy character. Whose merit dare apply it, But Modesty dares still deny it. Shall fixe my flying wishes, And determine them to kisses. My fancyes, fly before ye, Be ye my fictions; but her story. When you are mistresse of the song, Mighty queen, to thinke it long, Were treason 'gainst that majesty Your Vertue wears. Your modesty Yet thinks it so. But ev'n that too Infinite, since part of you New matter for our Muse supplies, And so allowes what it denies. Say then dread queen, how may we doe To mediate 'twixt your self and you? That so our sweetly temper'd song Nor be too sort, nor seeme to long. Needs must your noble prayses' strength That made it long excuse the length. Britain! the mighty Ocean's lovely bride! Now stretch thy self, fair isle, and grow: spread wide Thy bosome, and make roome. Thou art opprest With thine own glories, and art strangely blest Beyond thy self: for lo! the gods, the gods Come fast upon thee; and those glorious ods Swell thy full honours to a pitch so high As sits above thy best capacitie. Are they not ods? and glorious? that to thee Those mighty genii throng, which well might be Each one an Age's labour? that thy dayes Are gilded with the union of those rayes Whose each divided beam would be a sunne To glad the sphere of any Nation? Sure, if for these thou mean'st to find a seat, Th' hast need, O Britain, to be truly Great. And so thou art; their presence makes thee so: They are thy greatnesse. Gods, where-e're they go, Bring their Heav'n with them: their great footsteps place An everlasting smile upon the face Of the glad Earth they tread on: while with thee Those beames that ampliate mortalitie, And teach it to expatiate and swell To majestie and fulnesse, deign to dwell, Thou by thy self maist sit, blest Isle and see How thy great mother Nature dotes on thee. Thee therefore from the rest apart she hurl'd, And seem'd to make an Isle, but made a World. Time yet hath dropt few plumes since Hope turn'd Joy, And took into his armes the princely boy, Whose birth last blest the bed of his sweet mother, And bad us first salute our prince, a brother. Bright Charles! thou sweet dawn of a glorious Day! Centre of those thy grandsires shall I say, Henry and James? or, Mars and Phoebus rather? If this were Wisdome's god, that War's stern father; 'Tis but the same is said: Henry and James Are Mars and Phoebus under diverse names : O thou full mixture of those mighty souls Whose vast intelligences tun'd the poles Of Peace and War; thou, for whose manly brow Both lawrels twine into one wreath, and woo To be thy garland: see sweet prince , O see, Thou, and the lovely hopes that smile in thee, Art ta'n out and transcrib'd by thy great mother: See, see thy reall shadow; see thy brother, Thy little self in lesse: trace in these eyne The beams that dance in those full stars of thine. From the same snowy alabaster rock Those hands and thine were hewn; those cherries mock The corall of thy lips: thou wert of all This well-wrought copie the fair principall. Iustly, great Nature, didst thou brag, and tell How ev'n th' hadst drawn that faithfull parallel, And matcht thy master-piece. O then go on, Make such another sweet comparison. Seest thou that Marie there? O teach her mother To shew her to her self in such another. Fellow this wonder too; nor let her shine Alone; light such another star, and twine Their rosie beams, that so the Morn for one Venus, may have a constellation. These words scarce waken'd Heaven, when lo! our vows Sat crown'd upon the noble infant's brows. Th' art pair'd, sweet princesse: in this well-writ book Read o're thy self; peruse each line, each look. And when th' hast summ'd up all those blooming blisses, Close up the book, and clasp it with thy kisses. So have I seen to dresse their mistresse May Two silken sister-flowers consult, and lay Their bashfull cheeks together: newly they Peep't from their buds, show'd like the garden's eyes Scarce wak't: like was the crimson of their joyes; Like were the tears they wept, so like, that one Seem'd but the other's kind reflexion. And now 'twere time to say, sweet queen, no more. Fair source of princes, is thy pretious store Not yet exhaust? O no! Heavens have no bound, But in their infinite and endlesse round Embrace themselves. Our measure is not their's; Nor may the pov'rtie of man's narrow prayers Span their immensitie. More princes come: Rebellion, stand thou by; Mischief, make room: War, blood, and death names all averse from Ioy Heare this, we have another bright-ey'd boy: That word's a warrant, by whose vertue I Have full authority to bid you dy. Dy, dy, foul misbegotten monsters! dy: Make haste away, or e'r the World's bright eye Blush to a cloud of bloud. O farre from men Fly hence, and in your Hyperborean den Hide you for evermore, and murmure there Where none but Hell may heare, nor our soft aire Shrink at the hatefull sound. Mean while we bear High as the brow of Heaven, the noble noise And name of these our just and righteous joyes, Where Envie shall not reach them, nor those eares Whose tune keeps time to ought below the spheres. But thou, sweet supernumerary starre, Shine forth; nor fear the threats of boyst'rous Warre. The face of things has therefore frown'd a while On purpose, that to thee and thy pure smile The World might ow an universall calm; While thou, fair halcyon, on a sea of balm Shalt flote; where while thou layst thy lovely head, The angry billows shall but make thy bed: Storms, when they look on thee, shall straigt relent; And tempests, when they tast thy breath, repent To whispers, soft as thine own slumbers be, Or souls of virgins which shall sigh for thee. Shine then, sweet supernumerary starre, Nor feare the boysterous names of bloud and warre: Thy birth-day is their death's nativitie; They've here no other businesse but to die. But stay; what glimpse was that? why blusht the Day? Why ran the started aire trembling away? Who's this that comes circled in rayes that scorn Acquaintance with the sun? what second morn At midday opes a presence which Heaven's eye Stands off and points at? Is't some deity Stept from her throne of starres, deignes to be seen? Is it some deity? or is't our queen? 'Tis she, 'tis she: her awfull beauties chase The Day's abashed glories, and in face Of noon wear their own sunshine. O thou bright Mistresse of wonders! Cynthia's is the Night; But thou at noon dost shine, and art all day Nor does thy sun deny't our Cynthia. Illustrious sweetnesse! in thy faithfull wombe, That nest of heroes, all our hopes find room. Thou art the mother-phenix, and thy brest Chast as that virgin honour of the East, But much more fruitfull is; nor does, as she, Deny to mighty Love, a deitie. Then let the Eastern world brag and be proud Of one coy phenix, while we have a brood, A brood of phenixes: while we have brother And sister-phenixes, and still the mother. And may we long! Long may'st thou live t'increase The house and family of phenixes. Nor may the life that gives their eye-lids light E're prove the dismall morning of thy night: Ne're may a birth of thine be bought so dear To make his costly cradle of thy beer. O may'st thou thus make all the year thine own, And see such names of joy sit white upon The brow of every month! and when th' hast done, Mayst in a son of his find every son Repeated, and that son still in another, And so in each child, often prove a mother. Long may'st thou, laden with such clusters, lean Vpon thy royall elm fair vine! and when The Heav'ns will stay no longer, may thy glory And name dwell sweet in some eternall story! Pardon bright Excellence, an untun'd string, That in thy eares thus keeps a murmuring. O speake a lowly Muse's pardon, speake Her pardon, or her sentence; onely breake Thy silence. Speake, and she shall take from thence Numbers, and sweetnesse, and an influence Confessing thee. Or if too long I stay, O speake thou, and my pipe hath nought to say: For see Apollo all this while stands mute, Expecting by thy voice to tune his lute. But gods are gracious; and their altars make Pretious the offrings that their altars take. Give then this rurall wreath fire from thine eyes, This rurall wreath dares be thy sacrifice. 'A brood of phenixes, and still the mother: And may we long: long may'st thou live t' encrease 'With that great name Britannia, this blest isle Hath won her ancient dignity and style; A world divided from a world, and tried The abstract of it, in his general pride.' To be chastis'd sweet friend and chide by thee. Pale sons of our Pomona! whose wan cheekes Have spent the patience of expecting weekes, Yet are scarce ripe enough at best to show The redd, but of the blush to thee they ow. By thy comparrison they shall put on More Summer in their shame's reflection, Than ere the fruitfull Phoebus' flaming kisses Kindled on their cold lips. O had my wishes And the deare merits of your Muse, their due, The yeare had found some fruit early as you; Ripe as those rich composures Time computes Blossoms, but our blest tast confesses fruits. How does thy April-Autumne mocke these cold Progressions 'twixt whose termes poor Time grows old! With thee alone he weares no beard, thy braine Gives him the morning World's fresh gold againe. 'Twas only Paradice, 'tis onely thou, Whose fruit and blossoms both blesse the same bough. Proud in the patterne of thy pretious youth, Nature methinks might easily mend her growth. Could she in all her births but coppie thee, Into the publick yeares proficiencie, No fruit should have the face to smile on thee Young master of the World's maturitie But such whose sun-borne beauties what they borrow Of beames to day, pay back again to morrow, Nor need be double-gilt. How then must these Poor fruites looke pale at thy Hesperides! Faine would I chide their slownesse, but in their Defects I draw mine own dull character. Take them, and me in them acknowledging, How much my Summer waites upon thy Spring. I late the Roman youth's loud prayse and pride, Whom long none could obtain, though thousands try'd; Lo, here am left alas! For my lost mate T' embrace my teares, and kisse an vnkind fate. Sure in my early woes starres were at strife, And try'd to make a widow ere a wife. Nor can I tell and this new teares doth breed In what strange path, my lord's fair footsteppes bleed. O knew I where he wander'd, I should see Some solace in my sorrow's certainty: I'd send my woes in words should weep for me, Who knowes how powerfull well-writt praires would be. Sending's too slow a word; myselfe would fly. Who knowes my own heart's woes so well as I? But how shall I steal hence? Alexis thou, Ah thou thy self, alas! hast taught me how. Loue too that leads the way would lend the wings To bear me harmlesse through the hardest things. And where Loue lends the wing, and leads the way, What dangers can there be dare say me nay? If I be shipwrack't, Loue shall teach to swimme: If drown'd, sweet is the death indur'd for him: The noted sea shall change his name with me, I'mongst the blest starres, a new name shall be. And sure where louers make their watry graues, The weeping mariner will augment the waues. For who so hard, but passing by that way Will take acquaintance of my woes, and say Here 'twas the Roman maid found a hard fate, While through the World she sought her wandring mate Here perish't she, poor heart; Heauns, be my vowes As true to me, as she was to her spouse. O liue, so rare a loue! liue! and in thee The too frail life of femal constancy. Farewell; and shine, fair soul, shine there aboue Firm in thy crown, as here fast in thy loue. There thy lost fugitiue th' hast found at last: Be happy; and for euer hold him fast. Though all the ioyes I had, fled hence with thee, Vnkind! yet are my teares still true to me: I'm wedded o're again since thou art gone; Nor couldst thou, cruell, leaue me quite alone. Alexis' widdow now is Sorrow's wife, With him shall I weep out my weary life. Wellcome, my sad-sweet mate! Now haue I gott At last a constant Loue, that leaues me not: Firm he, as thou art false; nor need my cryes Thus vex the Earth and teare the beauteous skyes. For him, alas! n'ere shall I need to be Troublesom to the world thus as for thee: For thee I talk to trees; with silent groues Expostulate my woes and much-wrong'd loues; Hills and relentlesse rockes, or if there be Things that in hardnesse more allude to thee, To these I talk in teares, and tell my pain, And answer too for them in teares again. How oft haue I wept out the weary sun! My watry hour-glasse hath old Time's outrunne. O I am learned grown: poor Loue and I Haue study'd ouer all Astrology; I'm perfect in Heaun's state; with euery starr My skillfull greife is grown familiar. Rise, fairest of those fires; what'ere thou be Whose rosy beam shall point my sun to me. Such as the sacred light that e'rst did bring The Eastern princes to their infant King, O rise, pure lamp! and lend thy golden ray That weary Loue at last may find his way. Rich, churlish Land! that hid'st so long in thee My treasures; rich, alas! by robbing mee. Needs must my miseryes owe that man a spite Who e're he be was the first wandring knight. O had he nere been at that cruell cost Natvre's virginity had nere been lost; Seas had not bin rebuk't by sawcy oares But ly'n lockt vp safe in their sacred shores; Men had not spurn'd at mountaines; nor made warrs Nor lost in too larg bounds, our little Rome Full sweetly with it selfe had dwell't at home. My poor Alexis, then, in peacefull life Had vnder some low roofe lou'd his plain wife; But now, ah me! from where he has no foes He flyes; and into willfull exile goes. Cruell, return, O tell the reason why Thy dearest parents have deseru'd to dy. And I, what is my crime, I cannot tell, Vnlesse it be a crime t' haue lou'd too well. If heates of holyer loue and high desire, Make bigge thy fair brest with immortall fire, What needes my virgin lord fly thus from me, Who only wish his virgin wife to be? Witnesse, chast Heauns! no happyer vowes I know Then to a virgin grave vntouch't to goe. Loue's truest knott by Venus is not ty'd, Nor doe embraces onely make a bride. The queen of angels and men chast as you Was maiden-wife and maiden-mother too. Cecilia, glory of her name and blood, With happy gain her maiden-vowes made good: The lusty bridegroom made approach; young man Take heed said she take heed, Valerian! My bosome's guard, a spirit great and strong, Stands arm'd, to sheild me from all wanton wrong; My chastity is sacred; and my Sleep Wakefull, her dear vowes vndefil'd to keep. Pallas beares armes, forsooth; and should there be No fortresse built for true Virginity? No gaping Gorgon, this: none, like the rest Of your learn'd lyes. Here you'll find no such iest. I'm your's: O were my God, my Christ so too, I'd know no name of Loue on Earth but you. He yeilds, and straight baptis'd, obtains the grace To gaze on the fair souldier's glorious face. Both mixt at last their blood in one rich bed Of rosy martyrdome, twice married. O burn our Hymen bright in such high flame, Thy torch, terrestriall Loue, haue here no name. How sweet the mutuall yoke of man and wife, When holy fires maintain Loue's heaunly life! But I so help me Heaun my hopes to see When thousands sought my loue, lou'd none but thee. Still, as their vain teares my firm vowes did try, Alexis, he alone is mine said I . Half true, alas! half false, proues that poor line, Alexis is alone; but is not mine. Sound forth, coelestiall organs, let heauen's quire Ravish the dancing orbes, make them mount higher With nimble capers, & force Atlas tread Vpon his tiptoes, e're his siluer head Shall kisse his golden curthen. Thou glad Isle, That swim'st as deepe in joy, as seas, now smile; Lett not thy weighty glories, this full tide Of blisse, debase thee; but with a just pride Swell: swell to such an height, that thou maist vye With heauen itselfe for stately majesty. Doe not deceiue mee, eyes: doe I not see In this blest earth heauen's bright epitome, Circled with pure refined glory? heere I view a rising sunne in this our sphere, Whose blazing beames, maugre the blackest night, And mists of greife, dare force a joyfull light. The gold, in wch he flames, does well praesage A precious season, & a golden age. Doe I not see joy keepe his revels now, And sitt triumphing in each cheerfull brow? Vnmixt felicity with siluer wings Broodeth this sacred place: hither Peace brings The choicest of her oliue-crownes, & praies To haue them guilded with his courteous raies. Abash the purest beauties of the day? To whom heauen's lampes often in silent night Steale from their stations to repaire their light. Doe I not see a constellation, Each little beame of wch would make a sunne? I meane those three great starres, who well may scorn Acquaintance with the vsher of the morne. To gaze vpon such starres each humble eye Would be ambitious of astronomie Who would not be a phoenix, & aspire To sacrifice himselfe in such sweet fire? Shine forth, ye flaming sparkes of Deity, Yee perfect emblemes of divinity. Fixt in your spheres of glory, shed from thence, The treasures of our liues, your influence, For if you sett, who may not justly feare, The world will be one ocean, one great teare. Strange metamorphosis! It was but now The sullen heauen had vail'd its mournfull brow With a black maske: the clouds with child by Greife Traueld th' Olympian plaines to find releife. But at the last having not soe much power As to refraine brought forth a costly shower Of pearly drops, & sent her numerous birth As tokens of her greife vnto the Earth. Alas, the Earth, quick drunke with teares, had reel'd From of her center, had not Ioue vpheld The staggering lumpe: each eye spent all its store, As if heereafter they would weepe noe more: Streight from this sea of teares there does appeare Full glory naming in her owne free sphere. Amazed Sol throwes of his mournfull weeds, Speedily harnessing his fiery steeds, Vp to Olympus' stately topp he hies, From whence his glorious rivall hee espies. Then wondring starts, & had the curteous night Withheld her vaile, h' had forfeited his sight. The joy full sphaeres with a delicious sound Afright th' amazed aire, and dance a round To their owne musick, nor untill they see This glorious Phoebus sett will quiet bee. Each aery Siren now hath gott her song, To whom the merry lambes doe tripp along The laughing meades, as joy full to behold Their winter coates couer'd with naming gold. Such was the brightnesse of this Northerne starre, It made the virgin phoenix come from farre To be repair'd: hither she did resort, Thinking her father had remou'd his Court. The lustre of his face did shine soe bright, That Rome's bold egles now were blinded quite; The radiant darts shott from his sparkling eyes, Made euery mortall gladly sacrifice A heart burning in loue; all did adore This rising sunne; their faces nothing wore, But smiles, and ruddy joyes, and at this day All melancholy clouds vanisht away. Bright starre of Majesty, oh shedd on mee, A precious influence, as sweet as thee. That with each word, my loaden pen letts fall, The fragrant Spring may be perfum'd withall. That Sol from them may suck an honied shower, To glutt the stomack of his darling flower. With such a sugred livery made fine, They shall proclaime to all, that they are thine. Lett none dare speake of thee, but such as thence Extracted haue a balmy eloquence. But then, alas, my heart! oh how shall I Cure thee of thy delightfull tympanie? I cannot hold; such a spring-tide of joy Must haue a passage, or 'twill force a way. Yet shall my loyall tongue keepe this command: But giue me leaue to ease it with my hand. And though these humble lines soare not soe high, As is thy birth; yet from thy flaming eye Drop downe one sparke of glory, & they'l proue A praesent worthy of Apollo's loue. My quill to thee may not praesume to sing: Lett th' hallowed plume of a seraphick wing Bee consecrated to this worke, while I Chant to my selfe with rustick melodie. Rich, liberall heauen, what hath yor treasure store Of such bright angells, that you giue vs more? Had you, like our great sunne, stamped but one For earth, t' had beene an ample portion. Had you but drawne one liuely coppy forth, That might interpret our faire Cynthia's worth, Y' had done enough to make the lazy ground Dance, like the nimble spheres, a joyfull round. But such is the coelestiall excellence, That in the princely patterne shines, from whence The rest pourtraicted are, that 'tis noe paine To ravish heauen to limbe them o're againe. Wittnesse this mapp of beauty; euery part Of wch doth show the quintessence of art. See! nothing's vulgar, every atome heere Speakes the great wisdome of th' artificer. Poore Earth hath not enough perfection, To shaddow forth th' admired paragon. Those sparkling twinnes of light should I now stile Rich diamonds, sett in a pure siluer foyle; Or call her cheeke a bed of new-blowne roses; And say that ivory her front composes; Or should I say, that with a scarlet waue Those plumpe soft rubies had bin drest soe braue; Or that the dying lilly did bestow Vpon her neck the whitest of his snow; Or that the purple violets did lace That hand of milky downe; all these are base; Her glories I should dimme with things soe grosse, And foule the cleare text with a muddy glosse. Goe on then, Heauen, & limbe forth such another, Draw to this sister miracle a brother; Compile a first glorious epitome Of heauen, & Earth, & of all raritie; And sett it forth in the same happy place, And I'le not blurre it with my paraphrase. Little, buzzing, wanton elfe Perish there, and thanke thy selfe. Thou deseru'st thy life to loose, For distracting such a Muse. Was it thy ambitious aime By thy death to purchase fame? Didst thou hope he would in pitty Haue bestow'd a funerall ditty On thy ghoast? and thou in that To haue outliued Virgill's gnatt? No! The treason thou hast wrought Might forbid thee such a thought. If that Night's worke doe miscarry, Or a syllable but vary; A greater foe thou shalt me find, The destruction of thy kind. Phoebus, to revenge thy fault, In a fiery trapp thee caught; That thy winged mates might know it, And not dare disturbe a poet. Deare and wretched was thy sport, Since thyselfe was crushed for't; Scarcely had that life a breath, Yet it found a double death; Playing in the golden flames, Thou fell'st into an inky Thames; Scorch'd and drown'd. That petty sunne A pretty Icarus hath vndone. Ales Phasiacis petita Colchis, &c. The bird that's fetch't from Phasis floud, Or choicest hennes of Africk-brood; These please our palates; and why these? 'Cause they can but seldome please. Whil'st the goose soe goodly white, And the drake, yeeld noe delight, Though his wings' conceited hewe Paint each feather, as if new. These for vulgar stomacks be, And rellish not of rarity. But the dainty Scarus, sought In farthest clime; what e're is bought With shipwrack's toile, oh, that is sweet, 'Cause the quicksands hansell'd it. The pretious barbill, now growne rife, Is cloying meat. How stale is wife? Deare wife hath ne're a handsome letter, Sweet mistris sounds a great deale better. Rose quakes at name of cinnamon. Unlesse't be rare, what's thought vpon? Shame of thy mother soyle! ill-nurtur'd tree! Sett, to the mischeife of posteritie! That hand what e're it wer that was thy nurse, Was sacrilegious sure or somewhat worse. Black, as the day was dismall, in whose sight Thy rising topp first stain'd the bashfull light. That man -I thinke wrested the feeble life From his old father, that man's barbarous knife Conspir'd with darknes 'gainst the strangers throate; Whereof the blushing walles tooke bloody note Huge high-floune poysons, eu'n of Colchos breed, And whatsoe're wild sinnes black thoughts doe feed, His hands haue padled in; his hands, that found Thy traiterous root a dwelling in my ground. Perfidious totterer! longing for the staines Of thy kind Master's well-deseruing braines. Man's daintiest care, & caution cannot spy The subtile point of his coy destiny, Wch way it threats. With feare the merchant's mind Is plough'd as deepe, as is the sea with wind, Rowz'd in an angry tempest , Oh the sea! Oh! that's his feare; there flotes his destiny: While from another vnseene corner blowes The storme of fate, to wch his life he owes; By Parthians bow the soldier lookes to die, Whose hands are fighting, while their feet doe flie. The Parthian starts at Rome's imperiall name, Fledg'd with her eagle's wing; the very chaine Of his captivity rings in his eares. Thus, o thus fondly doe wee pitch our feares Farre distant from our fates, our fates, that mocke Our giddy feares with an vnlook't for shocke. A little more, & I had surely seene Thy greisly Majesty, Hell's blackest Queene; And Oeacus on his tribunall too, Sifting the soules of guilt; & you, oh you! You euer-blushing meads, where doe the blest Farre from darke horrors home appeale to rest. There amorous Sappho plaines vpon her lute Her loue's crosse fortune, that the sad dispute Runnes murmuring on the strings. Alcaeus there In high-built numbers wakes his golden lyre To tell the world, how hard the matter went, How hard by sea, by warre, by banishment. There these braue soules deale to each wondring eare Such words, soe precious, as they may not weare Without religious silence; aboue all Warre's ratling tumults, or some tyrant's fall. The thronging clotted multitude doth feast: What wonder? when the hundred-headed beast Hangs his black lugges, stroakt with those heavenly lines; ears And stretch their cold limbes in a pleasing fire. Prometheus selfe, and Pelops sterved sire Are cheated of their paines; Orion thinkes Of lions now noe more, or spotted linx. Bright goddesse whether Joue thy father be, Or Jove a father will be made by thee Oh crowne these praiers mov'd in a happy bower But with one cordiall smile for Cloe. That power Of Loue's all-daring hand, that makes me burne, Makes me confess't. Oh, doe not thou with scorne, Great nymph, o'relooke my lownesse. Heau'n you know And all their fellow-deities will bow Eu'n to the naked'st vowes. Thou art my fate; To thee the Parcae haue given vp of late My threds of life: if then I shall not live By thee, by thee yet lett me die; this giue, High Beautie's soveraigne, that my funerall flames May draw their first breath from thy starry beames. The phoenix' selfe shall not more proudly burne, That fetcheth fresh life from her fruitfull vrne. Hath aged winter, fledg'd with feathered raine, To frozen Caucasus his flight now tane? Doth hee in downy snow there closely shrowd His bedrid limmes, wrapt in a fleecy clowd? Is th' Earth disrobed of her apron white, Kind Winter's guift, & in a greene one dight? Doth she beginne to dandle in her lappe Her painted infants, fedd with pleasant pappe, Wch their bright father in a pretious showre From heaven's sweet milky streame doth gently poure Doth blith Apollo cloath the heavens with joye, And with a golden waue wash cleane away Those durty smutches, wch their faire fronts wore, And make them laugh, wch frown'd, & wept before? If heaven hath now forgot to weepe; o then What meane these shoures of teares amongst vs men? These cataracts of griefe, that dare eu'n vie With th' richest clowds their pearly treasurie? If Winters gone, whence this vntimely cold, That on these snowy limmes hath laid such hold? What more than winter hath that dire art found, These purple currents hedg'd with violets round. To corrallize, wch softly wont to slide In crimson waueletts, & in scarlet tide? If Flora's darlings now awake from sleepe, And out of their greene mantletts dare to peepe O tell me then, what rude outragious blast Forc't this prime flowre of youth to make such hast? To hide his blooming glories, & bequeath His balmy treasure to the bedd of death? 'Twas not the frozen zone; one sparke of fire, Shott from his flaming eye, had thaw'd its ire, And made it burne in loue: 'twas not the rage, And too vngentle nippe of frosty age: 'Twas not the chast, & purer snow, whose nest Was in the modest nunnery of his brest: Noe, none of these ravish't those virgin roses, The Muses, & the Graces fragrant posies. Wch, while they smiling sate vpon his face, They often kist, & in the sugred place Left many a starry teare, to thinke how soone The golden harvest of our joyes, the noone Of all our glorious hopes should fade, And be eclipsed with an envious shade. Noe 'twas old doting Death, who stealing by, Dragging his crooked burthen, look't awry, And streight his amorous syth greedy of blisse Murdred the Earth's just pride with a rude kisse. A winged herald, gladd of soe sweet a prey, Snatch't vpp the falling starre, soe richly gay, And plants it in a precious perfum'd bedd, Amongst those lillies, wch his bosome bredd. Where round about hovers with siluer wing A golden Summer, an aeternall Spring. Now that his root such fruit againe may beare, Let each eye water't with a courteous teare. Hee's dead! Oh what harsh musick's there Vnto a choyce, and curious eare! Wee must that Discord surely call, Since sighs doe rise and teares doe fall. Teares fall too low, sighes rise too high, How then can there be harmony? But who is he? him may wee know That jarres and spoiles sweet consort soe? O Death, 'tis thou: you false time keepe, And stretch'st thy dismall voice too deepe. Long time to quavering Age you giue, But to large Youth, short time to liue. You take vpon you too too much, In striking where you should not touch. How out of tune the world now lies, Since youth must fall, when it should rise! Gone be all consort, since alone He that once bore the best part's gone. Whose whole life, musick was; wherein Each vertue for a part came in. And though that musick of his life be still, The musick of his name yett soundeth shrill. Stay, silver-footed Came, striue not to wed Thy maiden streames soe soone to Neptune's bed; Fixe heere thy wat'ry eyes upon these towers, Vnto whose feet in reuerence of the powers, That there inhabite, thou on euery day With trembling lippes an humble kisse do'st pay. See all in mourning now; the walles are jett, With pearly papers carelesly besett. Whose snowy cheekes, least joy should be exprest, The weeping pen with sable teares hath drest. Their wronged beauties speake a tragoedy, Somewhat more horrid than an elegy. Pure, & vnmixed cruelty they tell, Wch poseth Mischeife's selfe to parallel. Justice hath lost her hand, the law her head; Peace is an orphan now; her father's dead. Honestie's nurse, Vertue's blest guardian, That heauenly mortall, that seraphick man. Enough is said, now, if thou canst crowd on Thy lazy crawling streames, pri'thee be gone, And murmur forth thy woes to euery flower, That on thy bankes sitts in a uerdant bower, And is instructed by thy glassy waue To paint its perfum'd face wth colours braue. In vailes of dust their silken heads they'le hide, As if the oft-departing sunne had dy'd. Goe learne that fatall quire, soe sprucely dight In downy surplisses, & vestments white, To sing their saddest dirges, such as may Make their scar'd soules take wing, & fly away. Lett thy swolne breast discharge thy strugling groanes To th' churlish rocks; & teach the stubborne stones To melt in gentle drops, lett them be heard Of all proud Neptune's siluer-sheilded guard; That greife may crack that string, & now vntie Their shackled tongues to chant an elegie. Whisper thy plaints to th' Ocean's curteous eares, Then weepe thyselfe into a sea of teares. A thousand Helicons the Muses send In a bright christall tide, to thee they send, Leaving those mines of nectar, their sweet fountaines, They force a lilly path through rosy mountaines. Feare not to dy with greife; all bubling eyes Are teeming now with store of fresh supplies. What Heav'n-besieged heart is this Stands trembling at the Gate of Blisse: Holds fast the door, yet dares not venture Fairly to open and to enter? Whose definition is, A Doubt 'Twixt life and death, 'twixt In and Out. Ah! linger not, lov'd soul: a slow And late consent was a long No. Who grants at last, a great while try'de And did his best, to have deny'de What magick-bolts, what mystick barrs Maintain the Will in these strange warrs? What fatall, yet fantastick, bands Keep the free heart from his own hands? Say, lingring Fair, why comes the birth Of your brave soul so slowly forth? Plead your pretences O you strong In weaknesse! why you chuse so long In labour of your self to ly, Not daring quite to live nor die. So when the Year takes cold we see Poor waters their own prisoners be: Fetter'd and lock'd up fast they lie In a cold self-captivity. find themselves their own severer shoar. Love, that lends haste to heaviest things, In you alone hath lost his wings. Look round and reade the World's wide face, The field of Nature or of Grace; Where can you fix, to find excuse Or pattern for the pace you use? Mark with what faith fruits answer flowers, And know the call of Heav'n's kind showers: Each mindfull plant hasts to make good The hope and promise of his bud. Seed-time's not all; there should be harvest too. Alas! and has the Year no Spring for you? Both winds and waters urge their way, And murmure if they meet a stay. Mark how the curl'd waves work and wind, All hating to be left behind. Each bigge with businesse thrusts the other, And seems to say, Make haste, my brother. That draw the chariot of chast Loves, Chide your delay: yea those dull things, Whose wayes have least to doe with wings, Make wings at least of their own weight, And by their love controll their Fate. So lumpish steel, untaught to move, Learn'd first his lightnesse by his love. What e're Love's matter be, he moves By th' even wings of his own doves, Lives by his own laws, and does hold In grossest metalls his own gold. All things swear friends to Fair and Good Yea suitours; man alone is wo'ed, Tediously wo'ed, and hardly wone: Only not slow to be undone. As if the bargain had been driven So hardly betwixt Earth and Heaven; Our God would thrive too fast, and be Too much a gainer by't, should we Our purchas'd selves too soon bestow On Him, who has not lov'd us so. When love of us call'd Him to see If wee'd vouchsafe His company, He left His Father's Court, and came Lightly as a lambent flame, Leaping upon the hills, to be The humble king of you and me. Nor can the cares of His whole crown When one poor sigh sends for Him down Detain Him, but He leaves behind The late wings of the lazy wind, Spurns the tame laws of Time and Place, And breaks through all ten heav'ns to our embrace. Yield to His siege, wise soul, and see Your triumph in His victory. Disband dull feares, give Faith the day: To save your life, kill your Delay. 'Tis cowardise that keeps this field; And want of courage not to yield. Yield then, O yield, that Love may win The Fort at last, and let Life in. Yield quickly, lest perhaps you prove Death's prey, before the prize of Love. This fort of your fair self if't be not wone, He is repuls'd indeed, but you'r undone. ''Tis not the work of force but skill To find the way into man's will. 'Tis loue alone can hearts unlock; Who knowes the Word, he needs not knock.' To the noblest and best of Ladyes, the Countesse of Denbigh, perswading her to Resolution in Religion, and to render her selfe What heau'n-intreated heart is this Stands trembling at the gate of blisse? Holds fast the door, yet dares not venture Fairly to open it, and enter. Whose definition is a doubt 'Twixt life and death, 'twixt in and out. Say, lingring Fair! why comes the birth Of your brave soul so slowly forth? Plead your pretences O you strong In weaknes! why you choose so long In labor of your selfe to ly, Nor daring quite to liue nor dy? Ah! linger not, lou'd soul! a slow And late consent was a long no; Who grants at last, long time try'd And did his best to haue deny'd: What magick bolts, what mystick barres Maintain the will in these strange warres? What fatall yet fantastick, bands Keep the free heart from its own hands? So when the year takes cold, we see Poor waters their own prisoners be: Fetter'd and lockt vp they ly In a sad selfe-captivity. The astonisht nymphs their flood's strange fate deplore, To see themselues their own seuerer shore. Thou that alone canst thaw this cold, And fetch the heart from its strong-hold; Allmighty Love! end this long warr, And of a meteor make a starr. O fix this fair Indefinite! And 'mongst Thy shafts of soueraign light Choose out that sure decisiue dart Which has the key of this close heart, Knowes all the corners of't, and can controul The self-shutt cabinet of an vnsearcht soul. O let it be at last, Loue's hour! Raise this tall trophee of Thy powre; Come once the conquering way; not to confute But kill this rebell-word 'irresolute,' That so, in spite of all this peeuish strength Of weaknes, she may write 'resolv'd' at length. Vnfold at length, vnfold fair flowre And vse the season of Loue's showre! Meet His well-meaning wounds, wise heart, And hast to drink the wholsome dart. That healing shaft, which Heaun till now Hath in Loue's quiuer hid for you. O dart of Loue! arrow of light! O happy you, if it hitt right! It must not fall in vain, it must Not mark the dry, regardless dust. Fair one, it is your fate; and brings Aeternal worlds upon its wings. Meet it with wide-spread armes, and see Its seat your soul's iust center be. Disband dull feares; giue faith the day; To saue your life, kill your delay. It is Loue's seege, and sure to be Your triumph, though His victory. 'Tis cowardise that keeps this feild And want of courage not to yeild. Yeild then, O yeild, that Loue may win The fort at last, and let life in. Yeild quickly, lest perhaps you proue Death's prey, before the prize of Loue. This fort of your faire selfe, if't be not won, He is repulst indeed; but you are vndone. <|endofpoem|> 'My thoughts are at a stand, of milke and blood, Delights of brest and side, which yeelds most good; And say, when on the teates mine eyes I cast, O Lady, of thy brest I beg a taste. But if mine eyes upon the wounds doe glide, Then, Jesu, I had rather sucke Thy side. Long have I mused, now knowe I where to rest; For with my right hand I will graspe the brest, If so I may presume: as for the wounds, With left He catch them; thus my zeale abounds.' 'Mother and Son, give eare to what I crave, I beg this milke, that bloud, and both would have. Youngling, that in Thy mother's armes art playing, Sucking her brest sometimes, and sometimes staying, Why dost Thou view me with that looke of scorne? 'Tis forceless envie that 'gainst Thee is borne. Oft hast Thou said, being angry at my sinne, Darest thou desire the teates My food lyes in? I will not, oh I dare not, golden Child; My mind from feare is not so farre exild: But one, even one poore drop I doe implore From Thy right hand or side, I ask no more. If neither, from Thy left hand let one fall; Nay from Thy foot, rather than none at all: If I displease Thee, let Thy wounds me wound, But pay my wage if I in grace be found.' 'But ah, I thirst; ah, droght my breath doth smother, Quench me with blood, sweet Son; with milk, good mother Say to Thy mother, See My brother's thirst; Mother, your milke will ease him at the first. Say to thy Son, Behold Thy brother's bands; Sweet Son, Thou hast his ransome in Thy hands. Shew Thy redeeming power to soules opprest, Thou Sonne, if that Thy blood excel the rest. And shew Thyselfe justly so stilde indeed, Thou mother, if thy brests the rest exceed. Ah, when shall I with these be satisfi'd? When shall I swimme in joyes of brest and side? Pardon, O God, mine eager earnestnesse, If I Thy lawes and reason's bounds transgresse; Where thirst o're-swayes, patience is thrust away: Stay but my thirst, and then my cryes will stay. I am better then Thy nailes; yet did a streame Of Thy deere bloud wash both the lance and them. More worthy I then clouts; yet them a flood Moistened of mother's milke and of Son's blood.' 'In silence of a Winter's night, A sleeping yet a walking spirit; A livelesse body to my sight Methought appeared, thus addight. In that my sleepe I did descry A Soule departed but lately From that foule body which lay by; Wailing with sighes, and loud did cry. Fast by the body, thus she mones And questions it, with sighes and grones; O wretched flesh, thus low who makes thee lye, Whom yesterday the world had seene so high? Was't not but yesterday the world was thine, And all the countrey stood at thy devotion? Thy traine that followed thee when thy sunne did shine Have now forsaken thee: O dolefull alteration! Those turrets gay of costly masonry, And larger palaces, are not now thy roome; But in a coffin of small quantity Thou lyest interred in a little tombe. O wretched flesh, with me that art forlorne, If thou couldst know how sharpe our punishment; How justly mightest thou wish not to be borne, Or from the wombe to tombe to have been hent! How lik'st thou now, poor foole, thy latter lodging, The roofe whereof lyes even with thy nose? Thy eyes are shut, thy tongue cannot be cogging; Nothing of profit rests at thy dispose. Thy garments, wretched fool, are farre from rich; Thy upper garment hardly worth a scute; A little linnen shrouds thee in thy ditch, No rents nor gifts men bring, nor make their suite.' 'If I be clad in rich array, And well attended every day, Both wise and good I shal be thoght, My kinred also shall be sought. I am, say men, the case is cleere, Your cosen, sir, a kinsman neere. But if the world doe change and frowne, Our kinred is no longer knowne; Nor I remembred any more By them that honoured me before. O vanity! vile love of mucke, Foule poyson, wherefore hast thou stucke Thyselfe so deepe, to raise so high Things vanishing so suddenly?' 'This is Christian faith unfained, Orthodoxall, true, unstained. As I teach, all understand, Yeelding unto neither hand. And in this my soule's defence, Reiect me not for mine offence: Thogh Death's slave, yet desperation I fly in death to seek salvation. I have no meane Thy love to gain, But this faith which I maintaine. This Thou seest, nor will I cease By this to beg for a release. Let this sacred salve be bound Vpon my sores, to make them sound. Though man be carried forth, and lying In his grave, and putrifying: Bound and hid from mortall eyes; Yet if Thou bid, he must arise. At Thy will the grave will open, At Thy will his bonds are broken. And forth he comes without delay, If Thou but once bid, Come away! In this sea of dread and doubt My poore barke is tost about; With storms and pirats far and wide, Death and woes on every side. Come, thou Steer's-man ever blest, Calme these winds that me molest; Chase these ruthlesse pyrats hence, And show me some safe residence. My tree is fruitles, dry, and dead, All the boughs are withered; Downe it must, and to the fire, If desert have his due hire. But spare it, Lord, another yeare. With manuring it may beare. If it then be dead and dry, Burne it; alas, what remedy! Mine old foe assaults me sore With fire and water, more and more. Poore I, of all my strength bereft, Onely unto Thee am left. That my foe may hence be chased, And I from Ruin's clawes released, Lord, vouchsafe me every day Strength to fast, and faith to pray: These two meanes Thyself hast taught To bring temptation's force to noght. Lord, free my soule from sin's infection By repentance's direction. Be Thy feare in me abiding, My soule to true salvation guiding. Grant me faith, Lord, hope, and love, Zeale of heaven and things above. Teach mee prize the world at nought; On Thy blisse be all my thought. All my hopes on Thee I found, In Whom all good things abound. Thou art all my dignitie: All I have I have from Thee. Thou art my comfort in distresse, Thou art my cure in heavinesse; Thou art my music in my sadnes, Thou art my medicine in my madnesse. Thou my freedom from my thral, Thou my raiser from my fall. In my labour Thou reliev'st me; Thou reform'st whatever grieves me. Al my wrongs Thy hand revengeth, And from hurt my soul defendeth. Thou my deepest doubts revealest, Thou my secret faults concealest. O do Thou stay my feet from treading In paths to hel and horror leading, Where eternal torment dwels, With fears and tears and lothsome smels; Where man's deepest shame is sounded, And the guilty still confounded; Where the scourge for ever beateth, And the worme that alwaies eateth; Where all those endless do remain, Lord, preserve us from this paine. In Sion lodge me, Lord, for pitty Sion, David's kingly citty, Built by Him that's onely good; Whose gates be of the Crosse's wood; Whose keys are Christ's undoubted word; Whose dwellers feare none but the Lord; Whose wals are stone, strong, quicke and bright; Here the light doth never cease, Endlesse Spring and endles peace; Here is musicke, heaven filling, Sweetnesse evermore distilling; Here is neither spot nor taint, No defect, nor no complaint; No man crooked, great nor small, But to Christ conformed all. Blessed towne, divinely graced, On a rocke so strongly placed, Thee I see, and thee I long for; Thee I seek, and thee I grone for. O what ioy thy dwellers tast, All in pleasure first and last! What full enioying blisse divine, What iewels on thy wals do shine! Ruby, iacinth, chalcedon, Knowne to them within alone. In this glorious company, In the streets of Sion, I Will sing the heauenly Alleviah. Amen. Tradition and antiquitie, the ground Whereon that erring Church doth so relye, Breakes out to light, from darknesse, to confound The novel doctrine of their heresie, Which plaine by these most sensible degrees Doth point the wayes it hath digrest to fall; Where each observing iudgement plainely sees, From good to bad, from bad to worst of all It is arriv'd: so that it can aspire, Obscure, deface, suppresse, doe what it may, To blinde this truth; to no step any higher By any policie it can essay. These holy Hymnes stuft with religious zeale And meditations of most pious use, Able their whole to wound, our wounded heale: Free from impiety, or least abuse, Blot out all merit in ourselves we have, And onely, solely, doe on Christ relye: Offer not prayers for those are in the grave, Nor unto saints, that heare not, doe not cry. Then in a word, since God hath thee preserv'd From the Inquisitors' most cruel rage, Though in their worth they else might have deserv'd To passe among the good things of this Age, Yet are in this respect of more regard, Since God would have them to these times appeare, So many having perisht; and be heard With more true zeale, that God hath kept so deare. By all which I conclude, from thine owne heart, Thou wicked servant, that might know and would not, He hath discharg'd himselfe in all and part, That would have cur'd your Babel, but hee could not. 'Thus haue I back again to thy bright name, Fair floud of holy fires! transfus'd the flame I took from reading thee.... ... O pardon, if I dare to say Thine own dear bookes are guilty.' vol. i. p. . 'Loue toucht her heart, and, lo, it beates High, and burnes with such braue heates, Such thirsts to dy, as dares drink vp A thousand cold deathes in one cup . Good reason: for she breathes all fire; Her white breast heaues with strong desire. Sweet, not so fast! lo, thy fair Spouse, Whom thou seekst with so swift vowes, Calls thee back, and bidds thee come T'embrace a milder martyrdom. Blest powres forbid thy tender life Should bleed vpon a barbarous knife: Or some base hand have power to raze Thy brest's chast cabinet, and vncase A soul kept there so sweet: O no, Wise Heaun will neuer haue it so. Thou art Love's victime, and must dy A death more mystical and high: Into Loue's armes thou shalt let fall A still-suruiuing funerall. His is the dart must make the death Whose stroke shall tast thy hallow'd breath; A dart thrice dipt in that rich flame Which writes thy Spouse's radiant name Vpon the roof of Heau'n, where ay It shines; and with a soueraign ray Beates bright vpon the burning faces Of soules which in that Name's sweet graces Find everlasting smiles. . . O how oft shalt thou complain Of a sweet and subtle pain; Of intolerable ioyes; Of a death, in which who dyes Loues his death, and dyes again, And would for ever so be slain, And liues and dyes; and knowes not why To live, but that he thus may neuer leaue to dy.' 'Heauns thy fair eyes be; Heauens of ever-falling starres. 'Tis seed-time still with thee; And starres thou sow'st whose haruest dares Promise the Earth to counter-shine Whateuer makes heaun's forehead fine.' How grandly vague is that 'counter-shine whatever ,' as it leads 'The deaw no more will weep dew The primrose's pale cheek to deck: The deaw no more will sleep Nuzzel'd in the lily's neck; Much rather would it be thy tear, And leaue them both to tremble there.' 'We goe not to seek The darlings of Aurora's bed, The rose's modest cheek, Nor the violet's humble head, Though the feild's eyes too Weepers be, Because they want such teares as we. Much lesse mean to trace The fortune of inferior gemmes, Preferr'd to some proud face, Or pertch't vpon fear'd diadems: Crown'd heads are toyes. We goe to meet A worthy object, our Lord's feet .' O, see the weary liddes of wakefull Hope Love's eastern windowes all wide ope With curtains drawn, To catch the day-break of Thy dawn. O, dawn at last, long-lookt-for Day, Take thine own wings, and come away.' sweetness. In the poem Hope, by way of question and answer, his Since 'tis not to be had at home She'l to the Moores and martyrdom.' Moreover the canon in 'Antiphon' is sound: 'When we come, in the beneath, nor his wings to be folded over it at the shut of eve. 'Her pure and eloquent soul Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinctly wrought, That one might almost say her body thought.' I have much the same conception of Crashaw's thinking. It was so 'Incense of love's and fancie's holy smoak ;' 'Leaue her ... the flaming heart: Leaue her that, and thou shalt leaue her Not one loose shaft, but Loue's whole quiver. For in Loue's feild was neuer found A nobler weapon than a wovnd. Loue's passiues are his actiu'st part, The wounded is the wounding heart. Liue here, great heart; and loue and dy and kill, And bleed and wound; and yeild and conquer still.' 'So, when the Year takes cold, we see Poor waters their own prisoners be; Fetter'd and lock'd-up fast they lie In a cold self-captivity . Th' astonish'd Nymphs their Floud's strange fate deplore, To find themselves their own severer shoar.' Young is striking in his use of the ice-metaphor: 'in Passion's flame Hearts melt; but melt like ice, soon harder froze .' 'Midnight veil'd his face: Not such as this, not such as Nature makes; A midnight Nature shudder'd to behold; A midnight new; a dread eclipse, without Opposing spheres, from her Creator's frown.' 'Like meteors in a stormy sky, how roll 'the fiery gulf, That flaming bound of wrath omnipotent;' Ib. ll. - 'Banners streaming as the comet's blaze;' Ib. l. 'Which makes a hell of hell,' Ib. l. we have the impress and inspiration of our Poet. 'Peace, good Reader, doe not weep; Peace, the louers are asleep. They, sweet turtles, folded ly In the last knott that Loue could ty. And though they ly as they were dead, Their pillow stone, their sheetes of lead Pillow hard, and sheetes not warm , Loue made the bed; they'l take no harm: Let them sleep; let them sleep on, Till this stormy night be gone, And the aeternall morrow dawn; 'In bonds of love united, man and wife, Long, yet too short, they spent a happy life; United still, too soon, however late, Both man and wife receiv'd the stroke of fate: And now in glory clad, enraptur'd pair, The same bright cup, the same sweet draught they share. Thus, first and last, a married couple see, In life, in death, in immortality.' 'Here sleep, whom neither life nor love, Nor friendship's strictest tie, Could in such close embrace as thou, Their faithful grave, ally; Preserve them, each dissolv'd in each, For bands of love divine, For union only more complete, Thou faithful grave, than thine.' p. . versification. Once read receptively, and the words haunt almost When unto Herbert's Temple I ascend By Crashaw's Steps, I do resolve to mend My lighter verse, and my low notes to raise, And in high accent sing my Maker's praise. Meanwhile these sacred poems in my sight I place, that I may learn to write.' ' Two went up into the Temple to pray. Two went to pray! O, rather say, One went to brag, th' other to pray. One stands up close, and treads on high, Where th' other dares not send his eye. One neerer to God's altar trod; The other to the altar's God.' vol. ii. p. . 'O cursed Pilate, villain dyed in grain, A little water cannot purge thy stain; No, Tanais can't do't, nor yet the main. Dost thou condemn a Deity to death, Him whose mere love gave and preserv'd thy breath?' Why, favourite of Heaven, most fair, Dost thou bring fowls for sacrifice? Will not the armful thou dost bear, That lovely Lamb of thine, suffice?' 'When Christ at Cana's feast by pow'r divine Inspir'd cold water with the warmth of wine; See! cried they, while in red'ning tide it gush'd, The bashful stream hath seen its God, and blush'd .' Carves out her dainty voyce as readily . Through the sleeke passage of her open throat A clear unwrinckled song ; closes the sweet quarrell, rowsing all, Hoarce, shrill at once; as when the trumpets call Hot Mars to th' harvest of Death's field, and woo Men's hearts into their hands :' staggers in a warbling doubt Of dallying sweetnesse , hovers o'er her skill, And folds in wav'd notes with a trembling bill a tide Of streaming sweetnesse, which in state doth ride On the wav'd backe of every swelling straine, Rising and falling in a pompous traine . Thus high, thus low, as if her silver throat Would reach the brazen voyce of War's hoarce bird . ... his hands sprightly as fire, he flings And with a quavering coynesse tasts the strings . The sweet-lip't sisters, musically frighted, Singing their feares, are fearefully delighted, Trembling as when Appolo's golden haires Are fan'd and frizled, in the wanton ayres Of his own breath: which marryed to his lyre Doth tune the spheares. with nectar drop, Softer than that which pants in Hebe's cup . The lute's light genius now does proudly rise, Heav'd on the surges of swolne rapsodyes, Creeps on the soft touch of a tender tone .' 'Now the declininge sunn 'gan downward bende From higher heauene, and from his locks did sende A milder flame; when neere to Tyber's flowe A Lutaniste allayde his carefull woe, With sondinge charmes, and in a greeny seate Of shady oake, toke shelter from the heate. A nitingale ore-hard hym that did use To soiourne in y^e neighbour groues, the Muse That files the place, the syren of the wood: Poore harmeles Syren, steling neere she stood Close lurkinge in the leaues attentiuely: Recordinge that vnwonted mellodye, She condt it to herselfe, and every straine His fingers playde, her throat return'd againe.' Indeed, entranced my soul. As I stole nearer, Invited by the melody, I saw This youth, this fair-faced youth, upon his lute, With strains of strange variety and harmony, Proclaiming, as it seemed, so bold a challenge To the clear choristers of the wood, the birds, That as they flocked about him all stood silent, Wondering at what they heard. I wondered too. And do so I: good, on. A nightingale, Nature's best-skilled musician, undertakes The challenge, and for every several strain The well-shaped youth could touch, she sung her own: He could not run division with more art Vpon his quaking instrument than she The nightingale did with her various notes Reply to: for a voice and for a sound, Amethus, 'tis much easier to believe That such they were, than hope to hear again. How did the rivals part? You term them rightly. For they were rivals, and their mistress, Harmony. Some time thus spent, the young man grew at last Into a pretty anger, that a bird, Whom art had never taught cliffs, moods, or notes, Should vie with him for mastery, whose study Had busied many hours to perfect practice. To end the controversy, in a rapture, Vpon his instrument he plays so swiftly So many voluntaries, and so quick, That there was curiosity and cunning, Concord in discord, lines of differing method Meeting in one full centre of delight. Now for the bird. The bird, ordained to be Music's first master, strove to imitate These several sounds; which when her warbling throat Failed in, for grief down dropped she on his lute, And brake her heart. It was the quaintest sadness, To see the conqueror upon her hearse To weep. 'He saw Heav'n blossome with a new-borne light, On which, as on a glorious stranger, gaz'd ' He sees also shining from heaven, With beauteous ray, the wondrous star , Which, brilliant and beautiful, goes Pointing the way straight towards Bethlehem.' 'He saw how in that blest Day-bearing Night, The Heav'n-rebuked shades made hast away; How bright a dawne of angels with new light Amaz'd the midnight world, and made a Day 'He sees the quiet shades and the dark Horrors of the happy, holy Night Smitten and routed by heavenly voices, And vanquished by angelic splendours.' 'Heav'n saw her rise, and saw Hell in the sight: The fields' faire eyes saw her, and saw no more, 'soon as Hell had vomited out This monster from the dark abyss, The flowers all around and the verdure appeared To feel the strength of the plague, the fury of winter .' 'What more can He now do to me, Who took From me the heavenly palace and my bright realms ?' 'He turns to his simple primitive forms, To raise Nature above the corporeal and low, And to make an unworthy mass of earthly clay The sublime head of the heavenly members.' 'Disdainefull wretch, how hath one bold sinne cost Thee all the beauties of thy once bright eyes! How hath one black eclipse cancell'd and crost The glories that did gild thee in thy rise! Proud morning of a perverse day , how lost Art thou unto thy selfe, thou too selfe-wise Narcissus! foolish Phaeton, who for all Thy high-aym'd hopes, gaind'st but a flaming fall .' 'O wretched Angel, once fairer than light, How thou hast lost thy primeval splendour! Thou shalt have from the eternal Requiter Deserved punishment for the unjust crime: Proud admirer of thy honours, Rebellious usurper of another's seat! Transformed, and fallen into Phlegethon, Proud Narcissus, impious Phaethon!' 'From Death's sad shades to the life-breathing ayre This mortall enemy to mankind's good Lifts his malignant eyes, wasted with care, 'He from the shades of death to the living air, Envious in truth of our human state, Lifted aloft his eyes by where The hollow vent-hole opened straight down.' 'the rebellious eye So the eyes of Satan: 'the sullen dens of Death and Night 'In the eyes where sadness dwells and death A turbid vermilion-coloured light shines.' 'Aurora shall set ope Her ruby casements.' 'Under the abysses, at the very core of the world, In the central point of the universe, Within the bowers of the darkest deep, There stands the fiendly perverse Spirit: With sharp thongs an impure group Binds him with a hundred snakes athwart: With such bonds girds him for ever, The great champion who conquered HIM in Paradise.' 'no rapture makes it live Drest in the glorious madnesse of a Muse, Whose feet can walke the Milky Way, Her starry throne, and hold up an exalted arm To lift me from my lazy urn and climbe Upon the stooped shoulders of old Time, Kind Guardian of the Muses' flock, Through whom it breathes in learn'd repose, Whether it choose the dripping rock, Or where the open sunshine glows. Not fairer he through trackless shade Who led Aemonia's flocks of old; Not even Apollo, when he play'd, With defter touch could charm the fold. If thou the eye serene dost grant, Green fields are ours, and streams and hills, And, since no Phoebus else we want, The Muses with their dulcet quills. Religion too with modest grace Through thee assumes a gentler mien; Through thee again can show her face, No more in dust and ashes seen. Her brows crown'd meetly, and, through thee, Her God in sight of all confess'd, She gives in her divinity Meaning and law to garb and vest. Lo, while we gaze, an ample state Adorns thee; what a lustrous sheen Plays on thy lips! with what a weight Thy reverent Genius toils within! For him on whom thy calm glance flows His star sheds down a fuller ray; The light that o'er thine aspect glows Is brighter than the shafts of Day. And there is cause. The Lord of heaven, Whose altar thou hast made so fair, Pours back the light that thou hast given, With glory meets His worshipper. Lo, on the threshold of thy God While thou dost stoop on bended knee, The altar from on high doth nod, Its plausive wings are bent to thee. And, glowing with his duty's worth, Each starry-tressed chorister With look that savours not of earth Tends like a rosy cherub there. And rightly. For, when ruin-wreck'd, With prayers and outstretch'd hands the fane Bemoan'd itself in all neglect, And sought elsewhere for help in vain, To thee by its own vows 'tis bound, And now repays thee. At the shrine Whose cry so well thy ears hath found Long, long may prayer and praise be thine! Wherefore shouldst thou on my page dwell, Where neither jest nor sport inviteth, That the jocund youth delighteth? Therefore, Reader, pass thee by To thine own idle jollity: The notes that trill from my poor lute Such as thee shall never suit; Nor here are Acidalian dews That Venus' roses sweet suffuse; Nor breath sets Cupid's torch a-blaze That lovers on my lines may gaze. Vainly shall mother and shall son Look here for lewd emotion. Cupid, seek thy mother's kirtle, Or hide thee 'neath her fragrant myrtle. And, Venus, thy Idalian hills Will better yield thee sport that thrills: Thither, therefore, goddess, turn; O'er thy lost Adonis burn; Or devise, if grief thee frets, Other shrines for thy violets: There, with Flora and the Spring The green earth enamelling, Thou mayst fill thy bosom's whiteness, He his wings in all their brightness, With all flow'rs that wait on thee When thou holdest revelry. Me my own poor flow'r will crown; Poor 'tis true, yet all my own Poor but pure. So let it be, Those unto others, this to me. No Circe-cup foams in my verse, To make fierce lustings still more fierce; No draft of Lethe here doth flow, Flow'ry above, deathly below; No false cheeks, with falser bloom A rose up-bursting from a tomb; No barb hid 'neath treach'rous plume; No poison spread as honey'd bait; No line where danger lies in wait: Here's nor spleen nor melancholy, That for me were unmeet wholly; Rarely do I raise a smile, Ne'er merge my wit in wanton wile; Never quicken Passion's pulse, Nor show nude Beauty to convulse, Until beneath the hoof o' th' flesh The strong man bound is in Lust's mesh. If jest I pass, do not repine To learn it reeks not of the wine; For my Apollo is celestial, And from Bacchus shrinks as bestial. Nothing that's foul my page contains; Nothing the modest eye arraigns; Nothing to cause averted face Lucretia every line might trace With calm, serene, unfearing eye, Nor blush stain cheek of Modesty. For not more pure the maiden's vow Whisper'd in tremulous words and low, As, girt in snowy robe, her breast Heaves like a wave in sweet unrest, And the white veil shows whiter brow In pureness of unfallen snow, With flame-gleam from meek-dropped hair Dishevell'd by the am'rous air: Soft strains with her soft voice blending, The marriage-rites to heaven ascending: Yea, not the altar's self exhaleth More chastely, as its God it haileth, That keeps far off unholy hands While there the priest with bow'd head stands. My verse is not the Queen of Love's, Nor knows the cooing of her doves: Her beauty me not overpowers, Though bright as skies when no cloud low'rs; Vainly at me her tricksy boy His arrows shoots. The sweet annoy I never felt; though oft and oft He hover'd o'er me, and with soft, Sly, 'luring glances his torch wav'd, And look'd to find me swift enslav'd; Offer'd a quill from his own wing, E'en from his mother's swan to sing; Ay, often Venus' love-wreaths weaving, On my brow the symbol leaving: He would laugh, and Poet style me, And with flatteries beguile me: 'Begone, begone, O wanton boy! Thy mother too, though Queen of Joy.' Thus did I speak. Naught of my song Shall thy tyranny prolong: Get thee, with thy torch and arrow, Unto the Veronian sparrow; Catullus To embalm thy pleasant sin: Be thy assaults however vile, He on thee will smile, and smile: He, thy love-locks curious twining, Shall ne'er come short of thy inclining: He thine own poet is, and will Give thee full license to instill By jest and quip and jollity Whate'er it listeth thee to try. Alas, that genius so august Should pander to adult'rous lust! Alas, that he, poet so true, Should poet be, Cupid, to you! O, what harvest of rich thought Judean seed from him had brought, If, up-climbing holy mountains, He had drunk from hallow'd fountains! Mother and son, I see them now, As round her neck his arms he'd throw, Nestling with his azure eyes, Her bosom's splendour for his skies; Kissing, and kiss'd in sweet reply, As soft winds o'er violets die: While she all her love discloses, Murm'ring on his lips' twin roses: His lips like hers, and hers like his, Glued i' the rapture of their bliss. Visions like these would Martial give With dainty touch and fugitive. The heav'nly Weeper there would bow Before her Lord, and pay her vow: Now is uttered gentle sigh, And now great tears gleam in her eye: That, offspring of the stainless Light; This, of the Pyx's mystic rite: In his verse, tears, sighs should fall Delicate and musical: In fine, whate'er in mine were mean Should radiant grow as sunlight's sheen. Go, then, go, insatiate boy, Nor me longer seek t' annoy: I've said it, nor shall e'er unsay: Go to thy mother, and there play. Why wilt thou whisper flattery, And praise my Muse's witchery Verses that reck not of thy smarts And smite me with thy fire-tipp'd darts? Go, get thee gone! Thy haunt must be Where there's wanton revelry, And the young minx with toss o' curls Opes her lips to show her pearls; Opes her lips, with some gross jest A foolish lover to arrest. Thither go, where falsely-fair Beauty is bought and sold; and where, Flaunting with painted cheek, and eye A-flame to ev'ry devilry, Base women seek base men, and tingle Their hot veins as they commingle, Baring their charms, 'neath alien roses Ministering such sweets as Hell composes. Hence, therefore, Cupid! Venus, hence! I yield not to your violence: I've said it, nor shall you allure My heart to own your sway impure. Another Cypris holds me now, Another Love receives my vow: For Love is here and Mother kind, But she a Virgin; He not blind. O Child! O Lord! great Mother blest! O wonder of thy holy breast! O Love, whose quiver's sacred pow'rs Ne'er send forth arrow that devours, Unless a shaft pierce the pure heart, That Thou mayst heal the blessed smart. Me whom Thou piercest, holy Child, Pierce, pierce me sure with arrows mild. Let Thy quiver grow more light As Thou dost me yearning smite: What my soul pants for, and still drinks And drinks, and thirsts, and never thinks To get enough, O give, still give. Thus would I die; thus would I live. Transfix this heart, Child: howsoe'er Thou comest, crown'd with thorns and bare, Or great with the awful heraldry Of nail and spear for Faith to see; Or greater still, on the holy rood Wet with the terror of Thy Blood; Or great'st of all, Thyself alone In meek might of Thy Passion, Still pierce this heart; O pierce it, Child: Thus would I drink in rapture wild. O that Thy bow might wound me still! O that of wounds I had my fill! Or, if some swifter wing there be, That it would fly to me to me! Behold, my Saviour, this poor breast, And take it as Thine arrows' nest: I seek not to be spar'd one blow: Thus would I have Thee still my foe; Still yearn that wounded I may be; For wounds like these are ecstasy. These are my wishes: and my Books, May they be his who on them looks! Seek'st, Reader, to be mine? Then, last, I ask thy eyes that they be chaste; Chaste, but not tearless; my dear Love To meet and know, as from above He comes, and still the Crucified, Proclaiming how for man He died By thorn, and nail, and spear, and cry, And bitterest words of agony: Say, should He meet thee thus in blood, Couldst thou e'en grudge of tears a flood? Ah, hard thy heart as e'er was stone, That all unmov'd can hear Him groan, Nor by a throb of feeling show Thou hast a sense of His great woe; While here He treasured human tears Hushing sad Mary in her fears, As to His feet in shame she crept, And with white drops them all bewept: More than Assyrian gold to thee Such tears, if thou their worth couldst see. His love with thine again will glow, His tears afresh with thine will flow. Here, Reader, glancing through my Book, Thou shalt upon His cradle look: To His sweet obsequies now turn, And mark how still my love shall burn. Here, with His Mother and with me, My ceaseless sacred joys shalt see: Whether Earth's Princes speechless stand As sudden darkness wraps the land; Or He lies hidden in the Cave, A temple now, and not a grave; But the third morning shall restore Him: Ah, much too slow those days pass o'er Him! Be true, ye shadows of the tomb; Enfold Him in a kindly gloom: Thus wilt thou pray; while my dear Light O strange! demands the help of Night. In fine, whate'er my Book shall say To my dear Love however pray, However fear, however weep, And with sweet tears its pages steep My words thy willing words will move. 'O, not enough these things I love; But they are sweet all things above; And certainly the love of Him Deserves all other loves to dim.' Two went up into the Temple to pray. Two went to pray! O, rather say, One went to brag, th' other to pray. One stands up close, and treads on high, Where th' other dares not send his eye. One neerer to God's altar trod; The other to the altar's God. Two men unto the Temple went to pray. That, with a downcast look, stood far away; This, near the altar, himself highly bore: This of the Temple, that of God hath more. B. Upon the asse that bore our Saviour. Hath only Anger an omnipotence In eloquence? Within the lips of Love and Joy doth dwell No miracle? Why else had Balaam's asse a tongue to chide His master's pride, And thou, heaven-burthen'd beast, hast ne're a word To praise thy Lord? That he should find a tongue and vocal thunder Was a great wonder; But O, methinkes, 'tis a farre greater one That thou find'st none. The ass of old had power to chide its wilful lord; And hast not thou the power to speak one praiseful word? Not less a marvel, sure, this silence is in thee Than that the ass of old to speak had liberty. The Lord 'despised and rejected' by His own people. See, O my kinsmen, what strange thing is this! Christ in's own country a great stranger is. The thief which bled upon the Cross with Thee Was more ally'd in consanguinity. B. The cripple at the Pool of Bethesda. What Tantalus is this, who health still craves So oft, yet vainly, from the refluent waves? And whence this happy wreck, this healing strife, This storm that drifts its victim into life? What new Tantalus is here, Couch'd by this swift-ebbing wave, Whom the healing flood comes near, Then retiring fails to save? O, what happy shipwreck this, And a cure by conflict wrought! Strange that woe should thus win bliss, From disaster life be brought! Harsh faith, and wouldst thou probe these signs of woe? O cruel fingers, would ye prove God so? Touch them, lest thou shouldst doubt? Then have thy will; But, ah, thy doubting makes them deeper still. O cruel faith, afresh my pangs to move! O ruthless fingers, thus their Lord to prove! See, touch the wounds; doubt not; but with such doubt Thou makest all those wounds afresh gush out. Whosoever will lose his life for My sake shall find it. Away, my life! Lord Christ, I have Thy death: My life's Thy death, and Thy death gives me breath. But come, my life, I'll hide thee in His tomb: The third day hence is not so long to come. Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, cometh unto the sepulchre. Thou holy Magdalene, Ere rosy morn was seen, Awokest; but e'en then Thy Sun was in thy ken. Now the great olden sun, Rising as wont upon The earth, is wildered With new beams round him shed. Lo, as a star he seems, Or torch with nigh-quench'd beams; Keeping himself still small How well might'st thou, O Sun, Submit to be outshone, And, as a morning-star, Herald One grander far! See here an easie feast that knows no wound, That under Hunger's teeth will needs be found; A subtle harvest of unbounded bread: What would ye more? Here Food itselfe is fed. Eas'ly-furnish'd table! And feast increas'd by eating: Still the mouth entreating. The bread itself, unable To tell whence it flows, Finds it most surely grows. Finds itself guest no fable! Whence is the mystic dower? From Him Who is all power. Let it no longer be a forlorne hope To wash an Ethiope: He's washt; his gloomy skin a peacefull shade For his white soule is made: And now, I doubt not, the Eternall Dove A black-fac'd house will love. How fair this Ethiop comes from th' holy fount! To wash a Black we may not vain account. How bright a soul is in a cloudy skin! The Dove now loves a black house to dwell in. B. Lo, a sinner, timid stranger, Seeks, in consciousness of danger, Where to leave sin's awful load. He to the Temple now is come, Bow'd in dread beside the door; He smites his bosom, dares no more. Ah, distress'd one, smite thee there Two mites, two drops yet all her house and land Falle from a steady heart though trembling hand: The others' wanton wealth foams high and brave. The other cast away; she only gave. Mary, which also sat at Jesus' feet, and heard His word. Behold, a new thing here host hanging on her Guest! Preparing for His mouth, His mouth's words are her feast! O Martha sister, spare thy labour and thy cost: Tending the food that perisheth, diviner food is lost. Bear, O bosoms, bear ye what Heaven's vintage showers, Sacred clusters pouring from ethereal bowers. Too happy, surely, ye who drink of wine so good; It comes into your bosoms a sparkling, cooling flood. Behold, with nectar'd star each head is shining, shining; Around your purpl'd locks a crown of life entwining. O Spirit of all flesh, to drink who'd be denied, Tell me, bright boy, tell me, my golden lad, Whither away so frolick? why so glad? What all thy wealth in counsile? all thy state? Are husks so deare? troth, 'tis a mighty rate. Come death, come bonds, nor do you shrink, my eares, At those hard words man's cowardize calls feares. Save those of feare, no other bands feare I; Nor other death than this the feare to die. Not bonds for Thee, Lord, but death too I'll brave, Says Paul, adept in double-meanings grave. The words meant more: his wish was to be bound For Christ; but loosed too, and with Him found. A god! a god! one-mouth'd the people cry; Only the worms, vile tribe, his claim deny. Yet they, too, soon confess themselves astray, For in his flesh they find ambrosia. Petre, cades, o, si dubitas: o, fide: nec ipsum, Petre, negat fidis aequor habere fidem. Pondere pressa suo subsidunt caetera: solum, Petre, tuae mergit te levitatis onus. Peter! doubt, and thou sinkest! O, believe; The sea will not thy faith, Peter, deceive. Things by their weight subside into the wave; Thy lightness, Peter, threats a wat'ry grave. Money! what wouldst thou, impious? Look and see, 'Tis Peter, not Iscariot, speaks to thee. Wouldst thou buy God? Nay, Simon, change thy tone, And try to sell that demon of thine own. Beneath that shadow they delight to crowd; To turn to shades by that shade not allow'd. From Peter's shadow what may we not hope, Now all thy glory it sustains, O Pope! If in the first He us'd His finger's touch, His hand's whole strength here could not be too much. Christ, the mute lips Thou bidst to speak; and lo, Straightway words flow: Thou mute wouldst have the speaking lips; but they Thee disobey. If, then, a single finger Thou didst use Mute tongues to loose, Thy whole hand now we need; for old and young Have ceaseless tongue. Why dost thou wound my wounds, O thou that passest by, Handling and turning them with an unwounded eye? The calm that cools thine eye does shipwrack mine; for O, Unmov'd to see one wretched is to make him so. Dost look upon my wounds, serene-faced Priest? Thy placid eyes give wounds more deep and sore. O, thy calm stare avert! pass on, at least: They who see woe unmov'd cause it, and more. Canst look, and by with look so tranquil pass, Nor heed my wounds? O, wounds on wounds, alas! O peace, too grim! on it set little store: Who looks unmov'd on misery makes it more. Whilst leaving Christ ah, fell disease! They're healed as they go: Their malady their medicine is, Because He will'd it so. But healed now ah, mind diseas'd! They from the Lord depart: Their healing their disease is now, Bred in an ingrate heart. Go, wretched mortal, antedate the day, Fill thee with care; Work thyself mis'ries, in a perverse way, Before they're there. Enough for me the day's cares in the day, The passing hour; Enough the tears that daily, yea or nay, In sorrow low'r. I have no leisure thus to antedate The coming woe, Nor to-day darken with to-morrow's fate; And so I go. Wretch, to thy woes add not to-morrow morn; And haste not thou to groan with ills unborn. Each day's laments, each hour's griefs, me suffice; Each morn, noon, eve, with rueful weeping eyes. No leisure is to look for griefs to be: Stir not to-day to-morrow's pains in me. Enough, too much; no more a master's yoke Endure, nor bow to lordly Lucre's stroke: His service from thy slavish neck is broke. Flee, Matthew, flee the cruel tyrant's sway, And hie thee, like a happy runaway, To the sweet cross that waits for thee to-day. Sweet restoration! by new joys outweigh'd, Brief sorrow is exil'd, And the lorn widow is a mother made Twice in her only child. O happy mother! then a mother most When all her hopes seem'd vain: Happy, who wept beside a dear son lost, And found him born again. One eye? a thousand rather, and a thousand more, To fix those full-fac't glories. O, he's poore Of eyes that has but Argus' store! Yet, if thou'lt fill one poore eye with Thy Heaven and Thee, O grant, sweet Goodnesse, that one eye may be All and every whit of me. With one eye! Ah! but rather to me give A hundred or a hundred-thousand, Lord. All Argus' eyes were no superlative To view the glories Thy three heavens afford. Or, O my God, if unto those who die, It be Thy will only to give one eye, Grant my whole body that one eye to be, That thus I may forever gaze on Thee. Ipse suum pelagus, morboque immersus aquoso Qui fuit, ut laetus nunc micat atque levis: Quippe in vina iterum Christus, puto, transtulit undas; Et nunc iste suis ebrius est ab aquis. Himself is his own sea; Dropsy his malady In sad severity. But Christ the Lord he sees, Who touching him him frees; Now joyous and at ease. Again, as I opine, The Lord transmutes to wine By miracle divine; And now, still more and more, His own wine-water store Pours mirth at ev'ry pore. No place for Him! So Him you drive away; You drive away your God, your God. O, stay! O height of human madness! wonders rare! No place for Him! without Whom no place were. Rich Lazarus, richer in those gems, thy teares, Than Dives in the roabes he weares: He scornes them now; but, O, they'l suit full well With th' purple he must weare in Hell! O happy Lazarus! richer in thy tears Than he who midst his riches purple wears. Hell's purple flames red-glowing shall be his: Ah, then how shall he count thy tears a bliss! Wroth that The Christ confesseth Christ He is! His fault that He is but Himself, I wis. Thee shall I reckon priest? Strange priest is he Who leaves not God His own Divinity! For all Thy signs they still refuse Thee, Lord; Those signs, blest symbols of Thy reign and word. Such signs, and not believe? Sure, who did thus Made unbelief itself miraculous. How cleverly the fishes he beguiles! He learns to use a hundred cunning wiles. Ho, thou good Fisher: Christ casts out His net; Now haste thou to be caught; for thee 'tis set. 'I am the voice,' thou sayest. Thou holy John, O silence strange! which as I muse upon, I see thy voice from God, not man, did come. Vincula sponte decidunt. Act. xii. . Who loadest him with chains, thou jailer stern, To be more kind e'en from those chains shalt learn. Lo, they dissolve, and their own knots untie. Go, fool, and chains with chains to fetter try. Let wind with murmurs harsh nowhere be heard; Nowhere wood tremble, its curl'd tresses stirr'd. Calm-flowing Sea greet Earth with kisses bland, Earth unto Sea its bosom kind expand. Let holy Peace on golden pinions steal, Till each blest brow is mark'd with its own seal. Ah, why elsewhere for this, need signs be sought? To each blest brow tears seal enough have brought. How fit our well-rank'd Feasts do follow! All-mischiefe comes after All-Hallow. Thy Father, Nature, here thy Father see: Whom womb of mother holds, thy Father He. Scant teguments the mighty Son enchain, Whom thou thyself not wholly dost contain. What reverence, Queen, to thine own womb is given, While God lies here beneath a lesser heaven! With sacred motion swells her conscious breast; Nor are the poles upborne by airs more blest. 'Neath the same roof are well conceiv'd by thee Vows, and the God to whom vows offer'd be. What other prayers o'er clouds and sky's vast bound Seek, by thy prayers this will at home be found. Blest soul, so nigh to thy supreme desire, To which 'neath its own shrine dwells its own fire. She may her body love, nor heaven prefer: What chains down others is a home to her. Lone, yet not lone, where'er thou dost recline; On that same couch are laid both thou and thine. Nay, when with thy chaste spouse, chaste wife thou'rt laid More strange, thyself thine own blest couch art made. Love to Christ an exile is, Yet the exile findeth Christ; All the dear familiar bliss, And the bosom-joys unpric'd. Ah, Lord, exile long to us, Never-ending e'en be sent, If we find Christ's bosom thus As our place of banishment. Go, smiling soules, your new-built cages breake, In Heav'n you'l learne to sing ere here to speake: Nor let the milky fonts that bath your thirst Bee your delay; The place that calls you hence is, at the worst, Milke all the way. Depart, ye smiling souls, to Heaven depart: Your tongues may there learn best the speaking art. Stay not to suck, sweet children, do not stay: Cry not; for you shall go the milky way. B. Ah, to Thy mother, ah, return, my fair, beloved Son; Return not to Thy native skies, my heaven-descended One. Thy mother's arms Thy heaven would be, enfolding Thee around; If thus within these innocent arms the great God might be found. Thy God was making hast into thy roofe; Thy humble faith and feare keepes him aloofe. Hee'll be thy guest, because He may not be; Hee'll come into thy house? No, into thee. O mighty Nothing! unto thee, Nothing, wee owe all things that bee. God spake once when Hee all things made, Hee sav'd all when Hee Nothing said. The world was made of Nothing then; 'Tis made by Nothing now againe. 'Nothing He said.' O precious silence of that sacred tongue! O what vast interests on that Nothing hung! He who once spoke the word, and all things made, Now re-makes all, when not a word is said. And is my hope grasp'd in these arms of mine At last, and do these eyes drink light from Thine? There let them drink with a new youth in store, And feel the dimming touch of age no more. Nay rather, if Thine eyes can give it room, Let Death's soft shadow gently o'er them come. Thee have I seen, O Child: enough for me: I care not to behold aught else but Thee. Often and often 'good words' fall Where thorns and briars rankly crawl; Their spines lay hold, and choke, and pierce Like to wild beast in hunger fierce. I know it: for like flash of sword I read 'twas so with Thee THE WORD: God, e'en my God, Thou wast in truth; But fell'st 'mong thorns, which show'd no ruth. Thou spak'st the word Thy word's a law; Thou spak'st, and straight the blind man saw. To speak and make the blind to see, Was never man, Lord, spake like Thee. To speak thus was to speak, say I, Not to his eare, but to his eye. Askest how thou may'st lightly loaded be? Christ's burden take from me: A wing to lift, no load to press thee down, Thou it wilt feel and own. Dost ask how heavy may Christ's burden be? Then list, O man, to me: So heavy , that whoe'er 'neath it enrolls, It lifts to the highest poles. Now, Lord, or never, they'l beleeve on Thee; Thou to their teeth hast prov'd Thy deity. See, loaves in heaps, blest growth, spread far and wide, For mouths innumerable multiplied. Feast holy, free, invincible like this, Claims the crowd's hunger, and their faith, I wis. God or the devil by you ought better to be known, Ye wicked ones, who charge your God a devil to own. Ign'rant of God, indeed, ye well might be; but O, The devil, your own father, how could ye fail to know? That on her lap she casts her humble eye, 'Tis the sweet pride of her humility. The faire starre is well fixt, for where, O, where, Could she have fixt it on a fairer spheare? 'Tis Heav'n, 'tis Heav'n she sees, Heaven's God there lyes; She can see Heaven, and ne're lift up her eyes. This new guest to her eyes new lawes hath given: 'Twas once looke up, 'tis now looke downe to Heaven. O bleeding wounds of brow, feet, hands, and side; Rivers which from a purple fount spread wide. No more to save us now that foot can go, But swims in streams which from its own wounds flow. Transfix'd His hand yet gives gives dewdrops holy, And into its own gift is melted wholly. O side, O torrent; for with torrent strong What flooded Nile more swift is driven along? Drops from His brow in thousands fall and fall; See to His face a cruel blush they call. By this sad shower the thorns unkindly nurst Soon into new-blown roses hope to burst. Each hair becomes a slender streamlet's bed, As if a rivulet from this ocean red. O waves too much alive with precious streams, Nowhere a fount of life more truly gleams. Wherefore associates He with sinners vile? Why hides He not His holy self the while? Askest thou, Pharisee, how this can be? Because 'tis Jesus, not a Pharisee. Show me Himselfe, Himselfe, bright Sir, O show Which way my poore tears to Himselfe may goe. Were it enough to show the place, and say, Looke, Mary, here, see where thy Lord once lay; Then could I show these armes of mine, and say, Looke, Mary, here, see where thy Lord once lay. Here, where our Lord once laid His head, Now the grave lies buried. The Lord commands the lepers far off from men to stay: But cleansed by the Lord, why went the Nine away? The leprosy remaineth, chang'd only in its seat: Expelled from the body, to the soul it makes retreat. Now by fit retribution a change is brought about: Before shut out from men, from God they're now shut out. Whatever story of their crueltie, Or naile, or thorne, or speare have writ in Thee, Are in another sence Still legible; Sweet is the difference: Once I did spell Every red letter A wound of Thine; Now, what is better, Balsome for mine. Each bloody, cruel character, Thorn, nail, and spear had written, When here, as man's great Arbiter, On Calvary Thou wert smitten, Thou wearest still above, O Lord: But now no longer wounds they are; They med'cine for my wounds declare. Under thy shadow may I lurke awhile, Death's busie search I'le easily beguile: Thy shadow, Peter, must show me the sun; My light's thy shadowe's shadow, or 'tis done. O Peter, Peter, let thy shadow fall Where I in wretchedness a-weary crawl: Here vainly shall my fates upon me call. Thy shadow me shall guide unto my sun Whoe'er sought Him in truth, and was undone? And so my light, thy shadow, shall be one. 'Tis I; behold My proofs, My wounds of old; Wounds which still bleed, if you will not believe. O, now to heal your faith My wounds behold, And healing from your faith My wounds receive. Iron forgets 'tis iron; the chains dissemble too; Nor has the prison doors for Peter now. Free truly is that pris'ner who by the prison's freed; Whom chains themselves unbind free is indeed. They quell disease, and sway Fate's iron bands, These lordly linen cloths touched by Paul's hands. Whence rose the glory of their happy fame? From the Fates' distaff, sure, these kerchiefs came. O doubly lost, with heaven so near! To perish in the neighbourhood Of vast but unavailing good! He shipwreck undergoes twice o'er Who perishes in sight of shore, And less by ocean is o'ercome Than by that hopeless glimpse of home. The hopes that almost seem our own Leave all the keener sting when gone; And just to miss felicity Is but emphatic misery. The world's Light shines: shine as it will, The world will love its darknesse still. I doubt though, when the world's in hell, It will not love its darknesse halfe so well. Behold the day of Christ! God comes with light; Yet the world loves the darkness of the night. Therefore the world to Stygian darkness will Be damn'd: and doth the world love darkness still? B. Lo, God comes girt with light, and all the world o'ershines: The world abides in night, nor watcheth for the signs. To Stygian darkness hurl'd on the great Day of Doom, Shalt thou, night-loving world, still love thy lightless gloom? A drop, one drop! how sweetly one faire drop Would tremble on my pearle-tipt finger's top! My wealth is gone: O, goe it where it will, Spare this one iewell, I'le be Dives still. See how new Phoenix into bright life springs, And fans the unhurting flames with golden wings. O'er snake what subtle change creeps as months flow, Bidding its faded frame with beauty glow. Why, on itself with worn beak having prey'd, Is raven old more youthful swift array'd? O'er second birth-throes bears Lucina sway, Whence an old man may have late natal day? Pharisee, know'st not? Well, now faith thou'lt learn: Wisely to know not, half faith's crown doth earn. He speaks: hence, leaves; my glory hence, away; Thou Zephyr 'mid my leaves no longer play; Begone: nor grieve: 'tis not the lightning's wrath, Nor wing of the storm-wind that smites: HE saith. O voice, than Zephyr sweeter far to me; More noble autumn-fruit could never be. To have a child thou deem'st so strange a thing, That thou art made a child for wondering. Whilst for a sign too eagerly thou dost call, Except by sign thou can'st not ask at all. Each blest drop on each blest limme Is washt itselfe in washing Him: 'Tis a gemme while it stayes here; While it falls hence 'tis a teare. Happy the water washt His sacred side; In washing Christ itself is purify'd. Each drop that trickled down His body, there Staying a gem, thence falling was a tear. B. Creeping and doubled erewhile in her woe, Lo, now she stands erect: Christ willed it so. Daemonic knots are loos'd beneath His hands; But thy heart, Pharisee, still rigid stands. Christe, malas fraudes, Pharisaica retia, fallis: Et miseros sacro discutis ore dolos. Ergo tacent tandem, atque invita silentia servant: Tam bene non aliter te potuere loqui. Nets, frauds of Pharisees, the Lord beguiles; His sacred lips disperse the wretched wiles. So they were silent enforc'd so to be: Such silence, Lord, their best address to Thee. Mother, why ask you right or left for me? The benefit would be an injury. Nor right nor left for me convenient are: From His sweet bosome either is too far. B. Cast Thyself from the pinacle whereon I set Thee, or I think Thee not God's Son. No; but He'l cast thee from the hearts of men, Satan. Wilt not believe He's God's Son then? B. Think on the coming flames I would prevent; Let not My tears for you in vain be spent. And yet they can't be spent in vain; for sure This water flames will quench, or else procure. B. Him, 'vile wretch!' Ah, myself how much I pride That I am utterly unlike to him! The 'vile wretch' leaves God's altar justified: Now go and boast thou art unlike to him. What darken'd noon is here? what mid-day night? It is the shadow cast by too much light. Saul may be blind or not; all I can say, Ta'en within Heaven's light earth's light fades away. When Christ with us on Earth did sympathize, And to the poor blind men restor'd their eyes, Happy they who had eyes. Not they alone; I call them also happy who had none. B. When Christ on earth moved on His pitying way, And bade the blind look up and find new day, Was eyesight then such bliss to every one? Yet I will deem them happy who had none. With such quick change could tear-bedew'd Dismay Give birthday smiles, and walk in white array? Heard I bereaved mother's wailings wild? No; the blest cries of one who bears a child! With such complacent joys is Folly fraught, That with this trouble she must needs be sought? So difficult and grave is she turn'd now, Can any one for her be wise enow? Must Ruin to be deeper taught aspire? To perish, does it so much brain require? Genius and skill in madness who would see? Forsooth, more simply you may wretched be! What daring leads you on, ungodly crew, To that which ev'n the Devil durst not do? Ye dare what he dares not? If truth be told, Ye tempt the Devil's self to be more bold. Go, Dragon! the fair stars smile at thy threat, Secure, serene, in native skies a-glow. Thy throne o'er sky and stars thou fain would'st set; Thou need'st not vault so high to plunge so low. Thou wondered'st! how else could'st thou so guarded? Yet thou believ'dst the mighty coming birth; Queen! thy faith's working is full well rewarded; God's daughter, thou God's mother art on earth. After so many battles with the Scribes, O Lord, Caesar himself comes; Caesar with his sword. They fight not arm'd with Caesar's sword indeed; But Caesar as their sword with craft they plead. Conquer'd thyself, O Caesar, make it known Who save thee, worthy so to be o'erthrown. Vain mourning this; why make ye such loud noise? She sleeps indeed, but so will not awake. Her sleep waits for the whisper of His voice Who a great promise to her father spake. Play, fishes, in your waters, safely play: We become fishes too, another way. Not to be taken, to you safety brought: But we are then most safe when we are caught. B. Careless, aneath the waves, ye fishes, play: We too are fishes, in a different way; Ye die, we live, being caught; and that for aye. Sport, fishes, now, within the secure sea: Lo, fishes too, in different kind, are we. In shunning nets your hope of safety lay; Our safety is to be the netter's prey. All we have is God's, and yet Caesar challenges a debt; Nor hath God a thinner share, Whatever Caesar's payments are. All is God's; and yet 'tis true All we have is Caesar's too. All is Caesar's; and what ods, So long as Caesar's selfe is God's? All things belong to God, yet Caesar has his all; Not due the less to God that they to Caesar fall. Not less they're God's because they're giv'n to Caesar's throne; For Caesar's throne itself belongs to God alone. Does He, base ass, thus deign to honour thee, Unworthy thus to bear th' incarnate God? Alas, Thy patience strangely tried I see, Thee carried thus who bear'st sin's awful load! B. A common ass does the Lord dignify? O, how unworthy such a burden high! With the Lord's patience, ah, what can compare? So to be borne, this also was to bear. Come, yoke Thy chariots of the air, O Lord; Triumphal honours let bright clouds afford. Dost seek a cloud? Our sighs a cloud will be, Or the sun melt into a cloud for Thee. Thy impious finger, would it, then, re-borrow The nails, the spear, each circumstance of sorrow? That on a living Christ thou mayst rely, Cruel, wouldst thou thy Christ re-crucify? Wretches, do ye put rage into cold stones? Why rush so eagerly to work so vile? Your stones unwilling add to Stephen's moans, But gladly heap a tomb for him the while. Upon His breast thy happy head reposes, Nor would that pillow change for Heaven's own roses: While thus His bosom bears up happy thee, To press His shoulders were enough for me. To see both blended in one flood, The mothers' milk, the childrens' blood, Makes me doubt if Heaven will gather Roses hence, or lillies rather. Who saw the infants' blood and milk of mother Flowing, alas, in a commingl'd tide, Doubtingly ask'd, and gaz'd from one to other, Whether Heav'n's rose or lily they espy'd. Is God with us? Woe's me, God is with you, ye beasts, I see. God is with you, ye beasts; God comes not to our golden feasts. That God may be with us, We must provide a lowly house. God comes to the humble manger, While to the great house a stranger. Their royal wealth of marble and of gold; In what rich couch an Empress-mother lies; What halls have heard a new-born Prince's cries. Wouldst know, sage Persian? He for whom Heaven keeps Such festival, in Bethlehem's manger weeps. I seek Thee mourning, and I seek again: Thou still Thy Father's business dost attend; And me, alas, sad mother of all pain, Of grief and tears, Thou surely wilt befriend. Whence that blush upon thy brow, Fair Nymph of the waters, now? Mark the glow all rosy-red Of the stream astonied. All the guests in tumult rush'd: The shy Nymph saw her God, and blush'd. Whence to your waters comes the glow of wine? What strange new rose their mazed streams hath flush'd? Haste, guests, and own your Visitant divine; For the chaste Nymph hath seen her God, and blush'd. Whence comes this rose, this ruddy colour strange? What blushes new the wondering water change? Mark, mark, gay guests, a present Deity! The conscious water blush'd its God to see. Safety unlook'd-for! silent 'light the wings Wherewith Thy voice, O Christ, swift-healing brings: Far-reaching hand Thy word has, and Thou healest Absent and present, even as Thou willest. As if to Him the winds their thunder threw; As if to Him hard rocks the water knew. Ye are your rocks, ye are your wind and wave: Shiprack with Him who fear, deserve to have. B. Begone, mine eyes; what would ye see beside? Go now in peace 'neath darkening brows to hide. Once and again, and yet again; behold; With one long gaze His beams in yours enfold. Then go, and guard your treasure safe from foes, And fast in yours those beams of His enclose. To look on Thee, O Christ, this first have I; Then, having look'd on Thee, straightway to die. Its sickle it implores with head bow'd low; Its sickle on the corn-field, Lord, bestow. Refusest Thou? The harvest dost delay? The sickle this hence fuller harvest-day. Her eyes' flood lickes His feets' faire staine; Her hair's flame lickes up that againe. This flame thus quencht hath brighter beames; This flood thus stained fairer streames. With placid force the gentle wave That consecrated dust doth lave, And a bright flame of golden hair Doth lave in light those waters fair. Purer the trickling waters shine Through contact with that dust divine; And purer through the waters' flow That flame of lucent fire doth glow. Askest, O Christ, my wish? My Christ I wish to see: To see Thee, O my sweet Christ, to see Thee. But, lo, I see; for now on Thee I fix faith's eye, And gazing so, dimness and darkness fly. But though I see, yet, ah, my Christ I wish to see; And since I see, O Christ, I would see Thee. That He a gift more precious might bestow, While she implor'd, discouragements He used. This was to give thus not to give; for, lo, He giveth oft who gives what's oft refused. Suppose He had been tabled at thy teates, Thy hunger feeles not what He eates: He'l have His teat ere long a bloody one; The mother then must suck the Son. The vine clings lovingly unto the elm; Love's flame draws thus a tree within its realm: But most, O vine, thou lov'st, whate'er its name, That tree from which the cross of Calvary came. Welcome, my griefe, my joy; how deare's To me my legacy of teares! I'll weepe and weepe, and will therefore Weepe 'cause I can weepe no more. Thou, Thou, deare Lord, even Thou alone, Giv'st joy, even when Thou givest none. O flock, O too much in thy Sheepherd blest, Where are fields worthy thee to feed and rest? Lest worthy pastures nowhere should be found, Christ is to thee the Sheepherd and the ground. B. O flock, in your great Shepherd all too blest, Where shall fit pasturage be found for you? That His fair flock may ne'er want food or rest, Christ is the Pastor and the pasture too. Thy wounds, O Lord, are mouths and eyes Let not the strange words breed surprise: Where'er I look, wounds seem to speak; Where'er I look, wounds in tears break; Mouths with ruddy lips disparted, Eyes as of the broken-hearted. Thou, Mary, on His sacred feet Rainedst thy tears and kisses sweet. Now retake thy kisses, tears; Cling thee there, there hush thy fears. See, mouths and eyes are here also; Swift they'll pay back thy loving woe. The Scribes audaciously blaspheme the Lord, That He a poor man pardon'd with a word. The Paralytic hears all that they say; Indignant takes his bed, and walks away. 'They took up stones:' What meant they by such rage? What wanted they with them? Their meaning's plain: 'Tis their old father's way O sad presage! He too took up the stones for bread amain. Thou'rt born, and, lo, bright King, Thy world is born, Is born with Thee from virgin tomb this morn. Hastes Nature to its second day of birth, And a new life in Thee crowns a new earth. Dear Sun, from Thy life all things draw life's breath; Nought thence is forced to die, save only Death. Nor is Death forced since in Thy grave to lie, Death will itself, O Christ, be glad to die. Earth, quaking, wavers: if that fact be true, The wavering earth forbids you waver too. The very keepers, if their voice you seek, Though speechless, even by their silence speak. His oculis, nec adhuc clausis coiere fenestris, Invigilans nobis est tuus usus amor. His oculis nos cernit amor tuus: his et amorem, Christe, tuum gaudet cernere nostra fides. Thy love these eyes did open; They're watching for us still: These eyes, of love the token, Our faith with love do fill. And dost thou ask, who in thy mother's womb So eager wast to hail Messiah come? Thou ask, and of Himself, if Christ He be? Well, Peter, dost thou wield thy active sword; Well for thyselfe, I meane, not for thy Lord. To strike at eares is to take heed there bee No witnesse, Peter, of thy perjury. O happy man, thy right-hand's birth beholding, Erewhile a sad funereal sight enfolding! The hand of no use, by the word Christ saith, Restor'd, is now become the hand of faith. & B. Thy hands are washt; but, O, the water's spilt That labour'd to have washt thy guilt: The flood, if any can, that can suffice, Must have its fountaine in thine eyes. The unjust judge washt his hands at the time: Ah, but no water can wash out thy crime. No water washt it out: if any will, 'Tis that which must from thy owne eyes distil. B. A fish Thou wishest, Lord; And without e'er a word, Behold, it swims to Thee, Fetching its own cost, free. Thou needest not to go In markets to and fro; Nor need'st Thou price to bring The fish owns Thee its king. Jesus, my Captain, give me victories! Alas, Jesus Himself, my Captain, dies. And if my Captain fall, what hope have I? No hope at all, unless my Captain die. B. Art Thou my Chief, best Lord, against the foe? But Thou, my Chief, me wretched! liest low. If Thou, my Chief, liest low, what help for me? Nay, if Thou liest not low, no help can be. Through open'd depths of His own heaven He soars, And from His face in heaven a new heaven pours. Scatter'd before Him down the welkin sinks The sun, and its own sun's near glory drinks. Moon unto sun for light no more beholden, Now from more lustrous sun returns all golden. These triumphs o'er Thyself Thou grantest, Lord; Triumphs no other could suffice to 'accord. Booms the thunder through the sky, Flash the lightnings, threats the storm; See SIN doom'd in fitting form! But, lo, the lightning, paled to light Mild and calm as ev'ning's star, Binds their brows with nimbus bright, Playing softly i' their hair. Yet the more the name's enlightening. Ah, 'tis too much to give Him for our sake: A drop might serve, why then an ocean take? Here may my life expatiate gloriously Amply, magnificently, Death may die. I call thee to His Supper, for so The Master spake: Thou sayest 'No,' pretending thou must thy oxen take. Farewell, O thou unworthy and wholly useless guest; Thy oxen for the Supper in truth were better prest. What Tagus, what Pactolus here is rolled? 'Tis not man's voice: a God, a God behold. Hail, too much honour thou to men hast done, Of Jove, of thundering Jove the worthy son. Hail, Lord, for why wouldst hide thee from thine own? A God e'en by thy tongue assuredly art known. The praise of eloquence for him was meet Who could persuade the lame to use swift feet. On whom doth this blest Bird its wings outspread? Where will it suffer its white feet to rest? O Jesus, hovering o'er Thy hallow'd head, Within Thy hair's sweet shade it seeks a nest. There does it breathe a mystic song to Thee, A melody unlike all earthly sound: That Bird alone to this pure nest may flee; This nest alone worthy the Bird is found. W. Good jailor, how is this, These doors thou lockest here? That Peter has the keys 'Tis now to all men clear. Thou say'st the doors self-open, And well thou sayest indeed; For by this very token He no other key doth need. Ah, let him perish in his harsh protests Who sinners checks to be the Saviour's guests! Sinners do entertain Christ as a guest: They spread the table, but He is the feast. & B. Grant you can fix upon a needle's end Each smallest object microscopes will lend. Rare beam to look through has the Pharisee, Whereby, in sooth, nothing itself sees he! Alas, unhappy, own the Christ thou wilt; Unhappy culprit, fearful is thy guilt. The gates of heaven for aye should keep thee close: Unhappy culprit, fearful are thy woes. O brothers twain, may it be yours to fill At right and left your places as ye will! A seat remains, I trust a fair one too Besides those high ones that were sought for you. I pray not that to me some part be given, But heaven itself, kind Father, grant me heaven. John and James, take your place at God's command: One at the right, th' other at the left hand. I ask not to be placed so, or so: To heaven, to heaven, good Father, let me go. B. Ad hospites coenae miraculosae quinque panum. Joan. vi. - . Feed on thy bread, on Christ too feed, O guest; With Bread on bread forsooth thou shalt be blest. Then shalt thou go, with Christ's bread satisfied, If hungering for the living Bread beside. O wretched! the world mutters. I do wonder Thou dar'st lift unarm'd hands against my thunder. Go, tyrant; put thy chains upon these hands: 'Tis done; and now full-arm'd the prisoner stands. O noble argument, Sophister rare! Thus Logic's fist to double be your care. This argument, poor Greek, what does it weigh? It says that you have nought at all to say. O bone, discipulus Christi vis maximus esse? The greatest of disciples wouldst thou be? Whoever's so ambitious, less is he. That thou mai'st not go less, to every one Submit: this, this is Christ's ambition. B. Which as a flame shall glow, since ye deride. Torches, Rome's torches those wild-waving ears A fiery crop shall prove, fed by these tears. With prouder stream, Nile, show Him to thine own; Call Him thy fountain-head, too little known: Now swelling for thyself, thyself o'erflow; And with its own joy let thy current glow. Cast not thine eyes on me, proud Pharisee, Lo, this blind man, though blind, yet Christ can see. Thou, Pharisee, canst not in Christ Christ find; The blind man sees Him, and the seer's blind. & B. Therefore I follow, lo, I follow on; My cross is with me, yet not rightly worn. It little is compar'd with Thine, I own; Yet little is not being wrongly borne. To be rich, truly rich, Matthew did take The right way, when he left all for Christ's sake. This is the one good use of ill-got wealth; For ill-got 'tis which, leaving, bringeth health. B. & Thou trim'st a Prophet's tombe, and dost bequeath The life thou took'st from him unto his death. Vain man! the stones that on his tombe doe lye Keepe but the score of them that made him dye. What means this labour on the tombs of saints, Causing their holy memory be cherish'd? Vain men! each stone which consecrates their plaints Doth tell us of the stones by which they perish'd. Take hold of Christ, O wretched one, And with Christ take salvation. But thy right hand, thou say'st, is dead; Yet take thee hold: His word is said. Take hold of Christ e'en without hand; Then safe in Christ, and well, thou'lt stand: Take hold of Christ in simple faith; This will be hand to thee, He saith. No medicine of thee, O Luke, I seek, Though thou art a physician, and I sick: Th' example of thy faith before my eyen, To me, physician, is the medicine. B. No medicine will I crave, Saint Luke, of thee, Though I be sick, though thou physician be: Pattern of faith, I plant thee in my soul, And thou thyself the medicine makest me whole. Thy dropsy's quench'd, but other thirst now rises, Which craves the more, the less the former thirsts. O happy malady, which death despises: Thirst for the stream which from life's fountain bursts. Thrice-happy souls, to whom the prize is given, Whom faith and truth have lifted into heaven: Gift of the heavenly Martyrs' dying breath, Gift of a Faith that burst the gates of Death. O Spring, O golden harvest of glad light; Sweet day, whose beauty never fades in night; The palm blooms in each hand, the garland on each brow, The raiment glitters in its undimm'd snow; The regions of unfading peace ye see, And the meek brightness of the Lamb: how different from me! W. Thrice-happy, happy souls, to you heaven's debt Is paid; you in your heavenly spheres are set. Whence this to you? ah, noble blood ye shed, And your strong faith the strong world buffeted. O ever-ripening harvest of long light; O Spring, O day not halved with lingering night; O hands with laughing palms, O crowned brows; O spotless robes, whiter than virgin snows! The beauteous eyes of fadeless Peace ye see The eyes of the sweet Lamb; yea woe is me! Came, then, His voice with power, Himself unseen? Heavens! this, though not to go, was to have been. The cure miraculous we can credit well, When the mere going was a miracle. Happy the man who was endu'd with sight, And saw a day well worth so long a night: Happy the eye, twice happy is the eye, That sees, and at first look, a Deity. B. Thrice-happy eye, that after such dark night Day worthy night so dark couldst see the light: O happy eye, eye thrice and four times blest, At once to ope, and upon God to rest. Laughter 'mid falling tears! O, which show'd greater folly, Vain laughter or vain fears? Such laughter 'mid such sorrow, O fools, ye may believe: Such laughter in such Presence Gave greatest cause to grieve. 'Aim not at things too high,' 'twas said of old, 'Lest ruin thence o'ertake thee, over-bold.' For me to dive too deep I think not well: I would not have my knowledge deep as hell. That house a stable? nay, bright Infant, nay: Where Thou art born a stable do we say? Of mansions in this world fairest of all, That house but little less than heaven we call. Seest thou that house with golden splendour flush? Seest thou that house with scatter'd roses blush? There is no gold, no rose there laughing lies: It is the light that falls from His fair eyes. I pray you, raise, my friends, no tomb for me, But let these conscious stones my record be; Nor will there then be need of verse to tell That here for his dear Lord a martyr fell. That which brought death, a tomb shall also bring, And be the witness of my witnessing. That fire which o'er the world a wandering flame, Bears not the name of John, but Love's own name To quench, my good Domitian, dost thou toil? Fire scarce is quench'd, methinks, by adding oil. Fallen, alas, in life's most tender dawn, With only so much life as die they may. But they 'gainst whom Death's arrows thus are drawn, Only taste death that they may live for aye. Gather thy powers, grim Dragon, furies, flames, All plagues which Erebus or midnight claims, Bid each Erinnys high her serpents flourish; Bring all, bring all, that thou mayst wholly perish. Since in the tragedy Wrought upon Calvary, No sword, O Christ, hast Thou, Whence, then, shall come the blow To Mary, virgin-mother? Not any wounds are given, Save as her Son is riven: No sword, O Christ, hast Thou; Whence, then, shall come the blow To Mary, virgin-mother? Perchance the dim-ey'd seer By sword intended spear: No sword, O Christ, hast Thou; Whence, then, shall come the blow To Mary, virgin-mother? Not spear or nail or thorn, Yet by all these I'm torn: No sword, O Christ, hast Thou; O whence, then, comes the blow To Mary, virgin-mother? In the dread tragedy Wrought upon Calvary, Whate'er, O suff'ring Lord, Smote Thee, pierc'd as a sword Mary, the virgin-mother. Ah, friend, wilt drink? Mary and her Babe divine Send from their press, for drinking, this new wine. One drop, yet this round world in worth resembling, A single drop in tiny circlet trembling. Drink hence; whate'er ye've drunk, how much soever, Trust me, such pleasant drink ye've met with never. Drink, drink again; to drink is left for you Is left what mortal thirst can ne'er subdue. Thirst's limit here will drinking's bound define: You drink all that you would drink of this wine. To weigh a man by bearded chin is vain, As if smooth cheeks no wisdom could contain. Forsooth the beard is a poor gauge of wit; With mental winter snowy head may fit. Hear what wise words from a Child-teacher fall, Nor think a hoary head the head of all. Thou water turn'st to wine, faire friend of life; Thy foe, to crosse the sweet arts of Thy reigne, Distills from thence the teares of wrath and strife, And so turnes wine to water backe againe. Blessing's in Thy every sign, But the Tempter each pollutes: Thou the water makest wine, He the wine to woe transmutes. Let the lamb go, by horned sire to play; The turtle, with its mate, flee far away: No need is here of lamb to mediate, Or tender bird to bear another's fate. At those poor offerings once, as 'twere, we play'd, Receiv'd by One who much allowance made. This is a gift the full-voic'd boast to wake, 'Take it, O Father, on its merits take.' A gift, a gift this is, which need not fear Being fit for God, since God Himself is here. I believe, Lord, Thou'rt able if Thou'rt willing, And I believe Thou'rt willing as Thou'rt able. Shine on me, O my Sun: Thy rays distilling, Shall melt my snow, and give me healing stable. As if the storme meant Him, Or 'cause Heaven's face is dim, His needs a cloud. Was ever froward wind That could be so unkind, Or wave so proud? The wind had need be angry, and the water black, That to the mighty Neptune's Self dare threaten wrack. There is no storm but this Of your own cowardise That braves you out; You are the storme that mocks Yourselves; you are the rocks Of your owne doubt: Besides this feare of danger there's no danger here, And he that here feares danger does deserve his feare. That the Sea with such violence falls on, 'Tis not his malice, but ambition: This the ambition, this the loud request, At Thy command, O Christ, to take his rest. B. Rome, have thy Caesar's arms wrought this for thee, That Romans only may not Christians be? Better for thee no Caesar had waged war, High-thundering on his fiery steed afar; Nor eagle's lordly form o'er all the world Had aye on thy stern ensigns been unfurl'd. How poor a triumph, Rome, o'er thyself wrought, By dint of such ambition to be nought! Conquering for sin, not Rome; sad laurel-wreath, More fit to shadow Cerberus' locks beneath. Old Pluto scarce wears diadem so base, Sits scarce so swart enthron'd in his own place. Caesarean triumphs, Rome, win this for thee Caesarean, that is, highest misery. And so it was; bread was that stone; Such bread, Christ, as was all Thine own. Since God so will'd that it should be, To have no bread was bread to Thee. Whate'er Fame tells of Amazons of old, Believe: here Amazonian faith behold. Of such strong faith a woman? Faith I see More than in grammar feminine to be. Two devills at one blow Thou hast laid flat; Was't Thy full victorie's fairer increase, That th' one spake, or that th' other held his peace? When Christ had given the multitude so much, So many miracles to see, taste, touch; Now Prophet, King, the holiest name Heaven wishes, Was Christ: I'd rather call it 'Loaves and fishes.' Whate'er Christ was, to their stay'd appetite 'Twas all more truly 'Loaves and fishes' dight. Was't winter? No, O no; beneath that Face: At least no natural winter there found place. Winter for Thee would breathe Spring's beauteous hours, With roses crowd its unaccustom'd bowers. But lest so sweetly Winter should retire, The soldiers' silence is't with money bought? Thy gift will tell a tale, though they say nought. Whatever with a bribe thou fain wouldst hide, More shamefully thou spreadest far and wide. Its 'hail' Caesarean eagle need not bring; Thy 'hail' comes wafted on a whiter wing. But let the 'all-hail' angel e'en be still; My 'hail' comes flitting on a whiter quill. To say my 'hail' what whiter being can be Than that white being who utters thine to thee? Virgin, dost ask what whiter than that white Might be? The Virgin who is asking, might. That white one, Virgin, may give 'hail' to thee; But thou, more white, dost give my 'hail' to me. My 'hail' o'er thy 'hail,' wouldst thou know its worth; He utters thine, but mine thou bringest forth. Is murther no sin? or a sin so cheape That thou need'st heape A rape upon't? Till thy adult'rous touch Taught her these sullied cheeks, this blubber'd face, She was a nimph, the meadowes knew none such; Of honest parentage, of unstain'd race; The daughter of a faire and well-fam'd fountaine As ever silver-tipt the side of shady mountaine. See how she weeps, and weeps, that she appeares Each drop's a teare that weeps for her own wast. Harke how at every touch she does complaine her; Harke how she bids her frighted drops make hast, And with sad murmurs chides the hands that stain her. Leave, leave, for shame; or else, good judge, decree What water shal wash this when this hath washed thee. Should I be dull? Fastings farewell! Sweet wine I have nor am asham'd in cask of mine, Which the full grape, unprest, from virgin shoot Produced for me in purest cluster'd fruit. This wine, now mellow'd by the thirtieth year, Lo, from the 'wood' will pour at touch of spear. It pours, and O how sweet the torrent glows, How sharp an odour on the rich air flows! What bouquet thus breathes from Falernian jars? What Massic wines tremble beneath such stars? O, I knew not; and, lo, this is Love's wine, Whence I such draughts, e'en I, need not decline. Vanquish'd, I wholly faint these airs along; I am no match, not I, for draughts so strong. But wherefore fear I their blest strength divine? Behold the water mingled with the wine! Come thou too, thou; kneel by thy Phoenix' tomb; Bring thy poor offerings too, my soul, and come. With thee no herbs and fragrant spice are seen Such odorous tribute gave the Magdalene; But these no herbs nor spices equal them These little liquid drops, each tear a gem. One tear is much: thine did not fall in vain, Sweet Magdalene; thou knewest the tears were gain. With these her Lord's head in amomum laid The humble feet the head's despair she made. Now, while her breast moist with such fragrance lies, She in a strife draws sweeter from her eyes. Lord Christ, these tears are well: well fits it too Life's everlasting morn drip with such dew. Arms see bows, quiver, arrows flying far, And every style in which Love went to war. These arms Love used nay, Himself was: His own Dart and darts' quiver was Himself alone. Now they but shine, and, dusty battle ended, In treasur'd glory are on high suspended. Time comes when unto Wrath these arms, both quiver And quiver's offspring, darts, Love will deliver. Ah, with what thoughts, what countenance wilt thou stand When its own guilt comes home to each right hand? Wretch, thou wilt see the wounds which thou hast made, And with what fatal skill thy fury play'd: Whether with bloody wreath thy fingers plied His temples, or thy spear drank His dear side; Or 'neath thy blow nails turned a cruel red, Or the scourge blush'd as at thy call it sped. Wretch, there the wounds thou gavest thou shalt see: To see the wound thou gav'st a wound shall be. Stroke self-avenging follows nails and spear: Its nail and spear of recompense are here. Such awful righteous wrath who would excite? Thy very wounds, O Christ, for Thee will fight. War calls: O friends, our arms let us prepare, And swords; forsooth, our throats let us lay bare. Why war prepare, if Christ His peace afford? Because Christ gives me peace, I take the sword. He gave what surer giver can be shown? He gave the peace, but then He gave His own. Why, Lord, this twofold glory of Thy ray, Giving him sight whose sight it takes away? Paul in that night God's inner light shall find: That he may see The Christ his eyes are blind. Not to be trampled on, though: vile foot, stay; Vile foot, is this to tread the heavenly Way? Which thus wears out the blessed Way to heaven. These tender travellers, feel they Night's dark sway, Mother and Child, too good for whitest day? For how will mother's cheeks, or lips of Child, How kisses fare, from Night and Winter wild? With lilies these, with roses, should be blest, Or sweetest breath of violet-perfum'd West. Such travellers merited to have no night, Or, if at all, one whiter than our light. Winter and Night these tender ones enclose, And what Night plots, or Winter, ah, who knows? Ah, lest fell Winter with its north-winds rage, Ill-omen'd Night its wonted fears engage. Ah, lest rough east-winds should Night's chariot draw, Or harsh south-winds should shake the heart with awe. What real perils troop in Darkness' train, Over what monsters Night extends her reign: What vagrant phantoms, which in false shapes go, Stern-ey'd, black-pinion'd, like the gods below! But standing forth in false forms or in true, For these, for those, a Virgin's dread is due. Come then, come, Cynthia, with resounding bow, And clang thy full-charg'd quiver at the foe. These monsters, those, thy darts unerring share, Nor truer aim thy brother's arrows bear: Come, then, O come, with all thy face a-flame, Worthy thyself to take Apollo's name. Thou know'st how Phoebus' sister ought to shine; If not, learn, Cynthia, from these cheeks divine. Placed here thy torch more beauty would display, And Night from hence prefer to draw its day; Such moon more modest shed its silent beam, And shamefac'd stay her softly-going team. O Moon, thy day no rose so chaste resembles, Thy torch with no such virgin beauty trembles. Come then, but bring thy troops of stars likewise; For they can try to shine like the Child's eyes. An eye, a star, twinkling with equal grace, The face of heaven and the Child's heavenly face. How well the charm of each transferr'd would show, From hand to hand the mutual sceptres go! Whether heaven's eye should deck His skiey brow, Or the Child's star adorn heaven's forehead now. If the Child's star on heaven's forehead shone, That eye would seem to Him not less His own. Place on His skiey forehead heaven's eye, Not less 'twould deem itself in its own sky. Such interchanges might the stars and skies Make charmingly with the Child's brow and eyes. For change of place the stars indeed might like An everlasting treaty now to strike; And differing though in numbers, e'en the skies Might wish to bargain for a change of eyes. With how much better stars the sky would shine, If as its stars it had these eyes divine! The stars would shine in how much better heaven, If as their sky this brow divine were given! So sky and stars may choose in vain they choose; For the Child's brow and His fair eyes refuse. Ah, wisely; for these eyes what better heaven Could wish? what better stars to brow be given? What though some gentle star more softly gleams? What if heaven's way thrice, four times, milky seems? Softer this eye which smiles in ruddy face; This milk-white brow, thrice, four times is its grace. To quit their heaven, let then these stars deny; Stars ought not to be ta'en from their own sky. They do deny; and soon in cloud are hid, In tender shadow of the drooping lid. Nor with their own defence content they rest, But seek a hiding-place in mother's breast. Thus the snow melts where His warm touch is plac'd, And genial Spring blooms out of Winter chaste. Such day such evening-dew deserves to drink; Such suns in such a bed deserve to sink. Sky-closing Eve, thy purple veil entwine, Sun, thy luxurious couch incarnadine; While wanton Thetis day too early closes, Thy shameless bed place 'mid Hesperian roses; Roses, forsooth, by conscious blushes painted, By sin with its own tell-tale redness tainted. Nights snowy-white, chaste couch to these suns be, Which virgin Thetis spreads o'er lucent sea; All-holy flowers, lilies inviolate, Roses with innocent blush upon them wait. Be theirs this bosom, where reclin'd all night They bathe themselves in ocean milky-white. And let them bathe, till their own morn say, rise; And Day itself drink splendour from these eyes. Yea, Lord, ask Thou: He is not wont to be, He cannot prove unkind, if ask'd of Thee. With favouring eyes He makes Thee all His love; Toward Thine heart, Lord, His whole affections move. Beholding Thy fair eyes Himself He sees; In Thy pure breast Himself He cherishes. By Thee He metes Himself, His godhead learns, And, sweet reversion! to Himself returns. He Thee, Thou He, in one Ye intertwine; He is His own no more, He is so Thine. Yea, Lord, ask Thou: He is not wont to be, He cannot prove unkind, if ask'd of Thee. Shall these lips, Lord, ask Him? But how should they? With rightful words and pure they fail to pray. If I should ask Him, then, what tempests dread, What anger thundering o'er this wretched head! His look perchance would gleam as lightning down Yea, oft, I know, as lightning falls His frown. Perchance the javelin of one angry word, One nod, would slay, and I should die unheard. I? I'll not ask: Lord, He is wont to be, He easy proves unkind, if ask'd of me. Yet, stay: I'll ask: not with these lips of mine; Yea, with my lips, my lips, Lord, namely Thine. Still do we keep Thee here, O Christ, our Love? Ah, envy much we gain from Heaven above! But be it so: Heaven is with stars a-blaze, And countless orbs that trick their tremulous rays: Moon, sun, and colour'd clouds, a fleecy store, By Evening's rosy touch embroider'd o'er. 'Twere little they should leave one light below: Let one be here, a thousand there may glow. 'Tis vain: since Thou ascendest not on high, To Thee, O Christ, descends the very sky. Be silent, crowd: my prayers so near me come, Before my Lord to me His speech addresses? Know, then, that voice of His my eyes possesses. Pity my night, Lord, pity; by that day Which smiled on me in Thee with earliest ray: Pity my night, Lord, pity; by that day Which if it sees Thee not, for night would pray: Pity my night, Lord, pity; by that day Which in faith's dimness fades not quite away. My mind's clear day bids my eyes' day awake: This grant, O Lord, nor the other from me take. O might I fire the angel-bands with joy, Thy seeking steps o'er anxious plains employ! A thousand lambs on the safe mountains play; All Thine they are, Thou certainly canst say. The one that err'd and stray'd behold in me; Be I the one to bring more joy to Thee! They give no joy who never caus'd a fear; Dangers themselves, o'ercome, the more endear. Of those retain'd, more wide be the employment; Of me recover'd, sweeter the enjoyment. Know'st not how much James owes thee for this stroke, Or how on his blest head thine anger broke. Lo, to himself a crown thou dost accord Forsooth with that selfsame beheading sword. Only this sacred sanguinary crown That sunder'd head was able to weigh down. See Christ with outstretcht hand new stars create, Which on that hand with due observance wait. That hand, sure, is their heaven: these stars are they Which He will hold in His right hand one day. Why of strange fruits dost boast, O sycamore? Of leaves not thine who gave thee such a store? He who waves to and fro on bough of thine, A cluster soon will be of the True Vine. Th' have left Thee naked, Lord: O that they had! This garment too I would they had deny'd. Thee with Thyselfe they have too richly clad, Opening the purple wardrobe of Thy side. O never could bee found garments too good For Thee to weare, but these of Thine own blood. Could not once blinding me, cruell, suffice? When first I look't on thee, I lost mine eyes. Thou cheat'st us, Ford; mak'st one seeme two by art: What is Love's Sacrifice but The Broken Heart? I would be married, but I'de have no wife: I would be married to a single life. High-mounted on an ant, Nanus the tall Was throwne, alas, and got a deadly fall; Vnder th' unruly beast's proud feet he lies All torne: with much adoe yet ere he dyes Hee straines these words: Base Envy, doe laugh on: Thus did I fall, and thus fell Phaethon. What, Mars his sword? faire Cytherea, say, Why art thou arm'd so desperately to-day? Mars thou hast beaten naked; and, O then, What needst thou put on armes against poore men? Pallas saw Venus arm'd, and straight she cry'd: Come if thou dar'st; thus, thus let us be try'd. Why, foole! saies Venus, thus provok'st thou mee, That being nak't, thou know'st could conquer thee? Foure teeth thou hadst, that, ranck'd in goodly state, Kept thy mouth's gate. The first blast of thy cough left two alone; The second, none. This last cough, Delia, cought-out all thy feare; Th' hast left the third cough now no business here. It is my great privilege to be the first to print the following Paul, fear thou nought; no poison bears this asp: It seeks to learn the virtue of thy hand. Not as a foe, but suppliant, it would clasp; Not fear, but pity, it would fain command. Now truly they believe that Thou art God! God witnessed by palate and by tooth! They know the smack of miracles that load And swell their paunches; yea, believe, forsooth. To a most pious race, Lord, Thou appealest, And stomachs most believing Thou revealest. O cruel Pain! I ask thee how Thou canst do what thou'rt doing now? Dost thou also or is't my fears? Drench His sweet eyes with scalding tears? O how that show'r furrows amain His undeserving cheek, as rain! More meet it were that I should know The tears that from His anguish flow: More meet it were that I should feel All dews that down His wan cheek steal: O is it thus? Would that it were! That I might weep Thy laden tear: Yea, blessed Jesus, would that I For mine own self could weeping lie: Mine own tears weep? nay, they are Thine, For all Thy tears, alas, are mine. Ah, not a tear that Thou didst shed, When sorrow bow'd Thy sacred head, But came of human woe or guilt, For which at last Thy Blood was spilt; And even if the tears were Thine, Being for my sake, they're rather mine. Yield place, ye wonders of the ancient stone Whence sudden-gushing streams were seen to flow: When the third day, blest rock, on thee has shone, Proudly with fount of sacred fire thou'lt glow. E'en as the dying swan, sweeter for failing breath, Dies not, but rather lives, in her last wistful song, Dost Thou, Lord, mid hate's din and close-approaching death, As Love, with melting voice, Thy dying love prolong. Behold a god! full-voic'd the people cry; Not man, but god, with shouts they him attest. What kind of god he is, ye worms, reply A crowd that know the secrets of his breast. Why seek'st thou, drowsy Peter, here to stay? Elsewhere such pleasant dreams thou see'st not, eh? O fairest monarch of the enamell'd field, Whose is the blossom'd pomp of ivory splendour, And whose the fleeces, snowy-white, which yield Long-flowing robes immaculate and tender. Ah, not like lilies 'tis divinely spoken Was Solomon, with sin encrimsoned; But not unlike and 'tis a better token Roses tear-wash'd, which hang the blushing head. To wake the tongue voice, hand too, Christ would use; To check it, but a bare word of command. Really, the tongue is as a horse rein'd-loose Starts at a word, stay'd only with strong hand. Not humbleness of mother, but of Child, Shines in the downward gaze of Virgin mild. The Virgin gazes where her God doth lie: She must look down that Heaven may meet her eye. These lambs also, e'en these, will ye, then, fiercely tear? Here to be wolves, at least here, ye will never dare. Alas, the wicked still are cruel; but ye'll learn He Who is now a Lamb will one day Lion turn. Will He O burden worthier angels' wings! Deign to be carried by swift fiend of hell? Vilest! to thee this no advancement brings; He no less God, thou no less demon fell. 'I am a voice, a voice,' says holy John. If so, how should thy mother barren be? This is unfruitfulness to muse upon; Tongue-barren women we so seldom see! John points out Christ; no wonder this we deem: One is a Voice, the other is the Word. Christ is before John; wondrous this may seem; For when was word before a voice e'er heard? To thee, good Tityrus, on starry wings shepherd The royal angel such 'glad tidings' brings. Surely the happy watcher never thought That he was watching when such joys were brought. And He, Whom thus the heavenly host reveal'd To shepherds 'mid their flocks in open field, Shepherd and Lamb at once; He took each name. Since, then, our God a Shepherd's name doth wear, The name of lamb who will not wish to bear? And who will not be shepherd, since God deigns To be a Lamb, for suffering of sin's pains? Thou knowest Nature's secret things And all her deepest counsellings All wonders of the primal Night Conceal'd from prying human sight; Knowest how the sea-tide pauses, The wandering stars too in their causes. But while to thee, in all else wise, Christ from thy thoughts an alien lies, In earthly studies to advance Is but loquacious ignorance; And he whose wisdom is but such, Of those things even knows not much. O, study thou beneath the Cross, Or all thy labour is but loss! 'Believe!' e'en Caiaphas, thy foe, believed Thee the True Vine; and Judas too, I think. Had they not, Lord, Thee as True Vine received, Could they have thirsted so Thy Blood to drink? The Lord is gone; and now, all evils dire, Hold back the darts which for our death you flourish: Yea, hold them back, nor waste on us your ire, For with our Lord's departure, lo, we perish. What sweetest cloud comes wafting golden shower? What gentle raindrops bring their shining dower? The cloud which stole our flame, our heart's desire, This very cloud returns with equal fire. O kindly-mindful cloud, which could not brook That we should mourn thee with so sad a look! 'Tis well; no other dew had countervail'd That which from earth to heaven was late exhal'd. What wicked one affix'd Life to Death's tree? O wretched gard'ner, call'st thou this engrafting? Nay, tell me who affix'd Death to Life's tree? O noble Gard'ner, this I call engrafting. And now th' art set wide ope; the speare's sad art, Lo, hath unlockt Thee at the very heart. And his owne hope, Hath shut these doores of heaven, that durst Thus set them ope. Now Thou art open wide; the barrier dear Of Thy great heart unclos'd by cruel spear; And nails as keys unlock Thee everywhere. Ah, he whose wicked hand thus forc'd the gate Of heaven, perhaps at heaven's shut door will wait One day, with outer darkness for his fate. Knowst thou this, souldier? 'tis a much-chang'd plant, which yet Thyselfe didst set; 'Tis chang'd indeed: did Autumn e're such beauties bring To shame his Spring? O, who so hard an husbandman could ever find A soyle so kind? Is not the soile a kind one, thinke ye, that returnes Roses for thornes? A harvest how unlike to its seed-corn! What soil yields husbandman such kindly terms? The rose he gathers, where he planted thorn. 'Twas night; and, Teacher all untaught, Thy darkness thou to Christ hast brought But while attent He speaks to thee Benignant words, that thou mayst see, Leading higher still and higher, As thy yearnings do aspire, Guiding thee, by sure grace given, Through secret paths that reach to heaven; Lo, the Sun on thee is risen, Bursting from his cloudy prison, Flushing with first bloom of day, Quivering with a golden light Such as on wav'ring seas gleams bright. The Sun is risen; yet darkness lies, Good Nicodemus, on thine eyes; But the night's thine own; for, lo, All heav'n above doth lustrous glow. Thou go unpunish'd? That shall never be, Since thou hast dar'd to mock my gods and me. Burn him in oil! The lictor oil prepares: Behold the Saint anointed unawares! With such elusive virtue was the oil fraught! Such aid thy olive-loving Pallas brought! The Baptist had to speak such floods of things, That well he might be Voice and nothing more: But one word only, lo, Christ speaks, which brings In one word all: My soul that Word adore! Death, Herod, press on thee; when angel's wing Brings joys which thou supposest dreams to bring. What gave he thee? Thy chains burst at his touch; But Death and Herod would have given as much. Thou hast the art on't, Peter, and canst tell To cast thy nets on all occasions well. When Christ calls, and thy nets would have thee stay, To cast them well's to cast them quite away. At the Lord's word thy nets were cast away: Never before thy nets so well were cast. Rightly to cast them is to cast away, When once The Master's order has been pass'd. Shall He, then, be a Lamb, to go Forth against such various foe? Lions ravenous, great of jaw; Wolves in vast herds, of mighty paw; Pards vengeful, prowling out and in Frightful, num'rous as my sin Awful of face, and gaunt and grim, Merciless to mangle limb by limb. Ah, goest Thou, gentle One, 'gainst these? And does terror upon Thee seize? O how unequal is the strife, And the prey so grand a life! With such as these to fight art fated? Nor in arms nor passion mated. What nets, hid in Thy silent word, By which not fish Thou takest, Lord, 'Behold my head, behold my face, Which sin's filthiest stains deface: Here pour Thy streams:' thou say'st to Me. But, Peter, needs not this for thee; For ere the cock a third time crow, Rivers of its own tears must flow. However high in Thy great love Thou wingest, And whatsoe'er within Thy hand Thou bringest, Against Thee, with its thunders, stands the world, Sign answering sign; Sin's banners all unfurl'd. Nay and let not the bold rash word appal One thought o' the world makes all Thy wonders fall: Against Thy mightiest signs this one it wields To the vast whole of Thine, no faith it yields. O, this black cloud! a white breast does it show A breast more white than a swan's neck of snow? More bright than golden sunshine let it be! However fair itself, 'tis black to me. From blacker cloud ne'er issu'd stormy blast, Nor thunderbolts of angry heaven were cast. Black! though no showers or shadows round it play; If Night it bring not, yet it takes our Day. Why scornest thou My tears, deceitful city? Scorn, scorn My tears, and thus thou mak'st them thine. The time will come when thou shalt seek My pity; But I shall scorn thy tears, as thou scorn'st Mine. While thou too dost this wretch's sins confess, Which he with hand and tongue deplores no less; If he 'gainst his own crimes twice just will be, What thinks he meanwhile of the Pharisee? What madness this, slumbers so rare to break, O ye, for whom even Christ's sleep doth wake! If sleep held Him, ye're terrified by dreams Dreams which redouble fear that only seems. Christ's sleep nought injur'd you, indeed 'tis true: Your faith's sleep, and that only, injur'd you. Now He yieldeth, now He falleth, As thy passion on Him calleth: Press thee nigher still and nigher, Urge thee higher still and higher; Cleave and cling, nor let thy hand Cease to plead, nor fearing stand. He thy triumph sees with gladness, Loves thee in thy clinging sadness; Seems thy foe, yet ne'ertheless Yearns in His heart of love to bless; Willing bears thy every blow, That from His own pow'r doth flow; Loves to hear thy interceding, His own voice within thee pleading. Ah, this seeming en'my of thine, Of fierceness giveth thee no sign; For Love no grim soldier is, Rough and severe, denying bliss. Eas'ly is that victory won, When the foe seeks to be undone. Siccine fraternos fastidis, improbe, morbos, Cum tuus, et gravior, te quoque morbus habet? Tantum ausus medicum morbus sibi quaerere, magnus; Tantum ausus medicum spernere, major erat. Dost loathe thy brother, Pharisee, Since his disease to Christ he brings? And knowest not that all men see Disease to thee more deadly clings? That he dare seek Healer so great, Shows great his disease to be; That thou dar'st scorn on Him to wait, Shows a greater cleaves to thee. We read within the sacred page Christ quench'd a fever's burning rage; Read that a dropsy's swollen flood Ebb'd at His word e'en as He stood. Well join'd these mir'cles each to other, As loving brother unto brother: How well these waters drown'd that flame, That fire these waters overcame! This life my sins with wretchedness make rife, Physicians by their art prolong this life. Is this to live long time? I hear one sigh; This is but fearing a long time to die. Thy leaves, Physician blest, medicines contain E'en for our medicines poor, our chiefest bane. This is to escape death well in death to lie; And this is to live long quickly to die. Wherefore Thy cross, O Lord, lay down, That we our own may make it: If ours Thou willest us to own, Thine, Lord, lay down; we'll take it: That, that, I say, with its huge beam, Which Thy prest body doubles; That cross, e'en that, our own we deem, For it has borne our troubles. Our sin Thy burden sendeth; Thy cross our crosses blendeth. All Hybla's honey, all that sweetnesse can, Flowes in Thy song, O faire, O dying Swan! Yet is the joy I take in't small or none; It is too sweet to be a long-liv'd one. What songs, like honeycomb, your tongue employ, Sweet Swan! but ah, Thou waitest for Death's call. O cease; these sounds are but a doubtful joy; 'Tis a sweet voice, but has a dying fall. What will Wrath's sea, so foully fierce, not dare? It spits upon our stars, Thy eyes so fair. Perchance e'en here some one now spits on Thee Who to Thy spittle owes it, he doth see. That He would go with thee thou pleadest, As for thy child thou intercedest. Ah, little knowest thou how Love, Such as descendeth from Above, Swifter far is than feet can go, Or any motion here below. 'Go with thee?' O how strange request! Thou wouldst later then be blest. That He may not slowlier come, Christ will not travel with thee home, For so to 'go' were to delay; All paths unneeded by The Way. Christ to Whom thou speakest pleading, Christ with Whom thou'rt interceding, He is here, and yet is yonder, Swift as is the bolt of thunder: He thy heart's desire will give; Have thou faith, thy child shall live. Whilst, Peter, thou art so astonished At thy draught of fishes, Methinks thyself by them art captive led: Christ to catch thee wishes, So as one bait He setteth all these fishes. Seene, and yet hated Thee? They did not see; They saw Thee not, that saw and hated Thee: No, no, they saw Thee not, O Life, O Love, Who saw aught in Thee that their hate could move. See Thee, Lord, and hated still? Ah, that were impossible: See and hate? He saw Thee never Who could see, nor love for ever. O Thou, the all-lovely One, He hath had no vision Who can see and hate; for why, Speck nor stain may none descry In Thy lowly, lofty Face, Full of sweetness, love, and grace. Be silent, crowd: my prayers so near me come, Before my Lord to me His speech, etc. Silence, silence, O vile crowd; Yea, I will now cry aloud: He comes near, Who is to me Light and life and liberty. Silence seek ye? yes, I'll be Silent when He speaks to me, He my Hope; ah, meek and still, I shall 'bide His holy will. O crowd, ye it may surprise, But His voice holdeth my eyes: O have pity on my night, By the day that gives glad light; O have pity on my night, By the day would lose its light, If it gat not of Thee sight; O have pity on my night, By day of faith upspringing bright; That day within my soul that burns, And for eyes' day unto Thee turns. Lord, O Lord, give me this day, Nor do Thou take that away. O self-baffl'd Pharisee, Vainly dost thou weary thee, Hoping at His holy mouth To catch other than the Truth: Stainless, holy, pure is He, Who would e'er expect black Night In the bosom of the Light, When the young sun in splendour burns, And the dawn to roses turns? Who, again, would seek to mark Acheron plunging i' the dark, Where white Cynthia's starry steeds Lave them by the glitt'ring meads? Who would aconite think to get From the fragrant violet? Or, watching by the babbling rill Gushing in pureness from the hill, Think thence poison to distil? In fine, instance nearer thee Would any ever hope to see Aught of good in Pharisee? Erringly, painter, thou portrayst Love bare: Not bare you make him, though no clothes he wear. Here, while laid open to believing hand, Though clothed indeed, bare truly see Him stand. O take, take with Thee, Lord, Thy stars, our eyes; What would they do left here without their sun? E'en what your sunless stars would do, ye skies, Would here by sunless stars of earth be done. Without their sun, those dark with showers we see; These without sun, dark with their tears would be. Why talk of death or bonds to me, As if these things a fear could be? My fear springeth not from thence; Nor in these is influence Me to trouble or alarm, Me to fret, or me to harm. The only bonds that fearful are Are the bonds themselves of fear; The only death looks dreadfully, Is lest I should fear to die. I ask, Who art Thou? is the Baptist's word. Straight from his Master this reply is heard: Lame walk, dead live: Who is This? I ask thee. Take, Lord, these gifts, small offerings of our hand, Though their own worth acceptance none command. Take, and while taking them, Thou Saviour sweet. E'en what Thou takest, Thou wilt render meet. Whether Thou deem them worthy eye or touch, Thou wilt be able, Lord, to make them such: Kind e'en to gifts themselves, as to those giving, Thou givest both when giving and receiving. Not lightly she escap'd a mother's doom, Although her Child dealt gently with her womb: Whate'er was spar'd at the one hour of birth, She travail'd with Him all His time on earth: The joy of childbirth quickly pass'd away; She felt the pangs of childbirth every day. How life and death in Thee Thou hadst a virgin wombe And tombe: A Joseph did betroth Them both. See how a circle tends, Beginning as it ends: Behold a virgin womb; Behold a virgin tomb; Behold, and wonder at the truth, A Joseph was espous'd to both! Begone, who goodness feign with a false face, Whom fiery tongues in earthy bosom grace. This rather all my prayers and gifts desire, A tongue of earth, if but my heart be fire. Soe I may gaine Thy death, my life I'le giue, My life's Thy death, and in Thy death I liue; Or else, my life, I'le hide thee in His graue, By three daies losse aeternally to saue. Aeternall Loue! what 'tis to loue Thee well, None but himselfe who feeles it, none can tell. But oh, what to be lou'd of Thee as well, None, not himselfe who feeles it, none can tell. That Faith which only justifies A sinner as in guilt he lies, Bow'd aneath the awful blood, Clinging to the uplifted rood, Is not alone so as nor Love Nor heavenly Hope may in it move, To thrill with touch of ecstasy The bruised heart, the swimming eye. What, censor! bitter to ill end, Dost thou thy dogma still defend? And wouldest thou to hands allied Mutual sceptres see denied, Snapping betwixt Faith and Love The tie that binds them from Above? I tell thee nay, stone-hearted one, The Faith of Christ is not alone: Take Faith away, and Love will sigh; Take Hope away, and Faith will die; Take Faith away, Love will do naught; Take Love away, and Faith's distraught: For I tell thee, vain sophister, They're as sister unto sister. But mark, this Love that brings Faith joy Is not blind Cupid. Ah, bright Boy, Begone; thou shalt not, wouldst thou, stay; Go, get thee swift from light o' day; Go, get thee now to the vast shades, And there indulge thy escapades: Thou in Elysian realms mayst reign A fitting deity, not vain: Go therefore, and with thee thy bow And quiver. Well it is below That these for thee shall form a pyre, To which thy torch will furnish fire. But, ah, thou hast a heart of stone, Who wouldest make Faith live alone, Loos'ning the sweet ties Love has found To bind Faith to her, herself bound. O, it is cruel thus to sever Sisters whom God hath joined ever; Whose clasped hands so closely cling, E'en as vine-tendrils ring on ring: You may not tell there's more than one, So absolute the union. Where shall you find beneath the sky Two differing so variously, And yet each life in other bound, Touch one, the other you shall wound: Or where, 'mid all the pairs on earth, Twins through marriage or through birth, Shall you find two so truly one? Arms twining in affection, They clasp each other, chin to chin, Above, below, without, within, Embracing and embrac'd by turns; Yet not with such wild-fire as burns In Lust's hot touch, and clasp and grasp Eager and stinging as tongue of asp. Not so closely interwine The graceful Elm and clinging Vine, When to bosom of the tree Bacchus' clusters prest you see, And the Nymph the fruit receives, And hides it amid dewy leaves; Ev'n as the poets tell of old, In legends of the Age of Gold. Faith and Love know no such flame, Their pure twining brings no shame; Look for taint, you'll find it missing: 'Tis as flower flower kissing; Or twin-roses dewy dripping, And twin-bees their honey sipping. The Turtle-dove, robb'd of her mate, Pines and mourns disconsolate; Yet still lives on in widow'd grief, Knowing at times Hope's sweet relief. But Faith when once of Love bereft Loses her all, has nothing left; Nor mourns nor frets nor pales she's dead, Struck to the heart astonied. The Palm that by the wintry blast Sees her companion-tree downcast, Whose mighty shadow o'er her threw Protection when the fierce storm blew; Her umbrage sheds, and quivering Seeks that some fav'ring wind would bring Her branches with his boughs to mingle, Since she is left in sadness, single; Wretched, she wears and wastes away, Leaf following leaf in wan decay, Until at last, naked and bare, She shivers in the piercing air; And when the Spring comes, Winter sped, 'Tis vain to call her she is dead! But when Love from Faith is gone, Faith lingers not still on and on; That while her form yet meets your eye, You can pronounce 'She'll surely die.' SHE'S DEAD i' the instant: or you will Maintain a stark corpse liveth still, Whose soul has pass'd beyond the sky, Sunder'd until the last great Cry. Faith is the body, Love the soul; Take Love from it, you take the whole: Now, now indeed thy Faith's alone, But being alone, lo, it is none. To make it clear, turn Homer's page That paints Achilles' hate and rage, When, having mighty Hector slain, He dragg'd him dead over the plain That Hector whom the chariot feels Dragg'd helpless, lifeless at its wheels, Was it the same who, with proud crest, That chariot's lord had lately prest, Eager the victory to wrest? Hercules' name and deeds dost see In Oeta's bloody tragedy, When dead the mighty hero lay, Of jealousy the poison'd prey. His living strength the lion slew, And hide Nemaean round him threw: 'Gainst more than lion-rage of Death Dost summon the sad corpse of Faith? Sure Love with love for Faith will burn, While Faith herself trusts Love in turn. That Faith alone, lording it high, Which Hope despairs of, and with cry Of anguish Love can never love, Is not the Faith sent from Above: The Faith that thus would be alone, What is't to us desolate, lone? Faith then, that loved will not love Nor hope may no such Faith me move! But ever in my bosom lie Faith, Hope, and Love in trinity: Yea, Love himself shall Faith's best lover prove, And Faith confirm his strongest faith in Love. O young Achilles, whom a mother's care Hath dipp'd as in a sacred Stygian wave; Whole, but yet not secure, thou hence dost fare, For there are wounds from which it will not save. A thousand ways of entrance open lie For evil; not alone against thy heel The prince of darkness in his rage lets-fly The thousand arrows thou mayst dread to feel. But if remember'd health may still have given True health, and to have been is still to be, Thou seem'st as one whose bark, by storms unriven, Still rides, as yet unconquer'd, on the sea; And, while on shore thy friends thou visitest, And the sad company of them that sin, With furled sails upon the waves at rest, Thy bark floats idly till thou art within. But if for this thou criest overbold, 'Bring wine! enjoy the moment as it goes; Leave to old age its cares; dismiss the cold, While in new realms for ever reigns the rose!' Ah, know that not in revels such as these Learn we to struggle with the spiteful gale; Nor thus can hope to rescue from rough seas The broken cable and the driven sail. These waves must in another wave be wash'd, This shipwreck in another shipwreck drown'd; The eye in such ill storms so vilely dashed, A happier wreck in its own tears be found. But thou, O dust profane, and of each air The plaything doom'd, with what face wilt thou bear The Judgment-throne? how huge a stormy cloud Will lower upon thee! how wilt thou be bow'd With iron nod, the prey of frowning Face, By thunder to be driven far off, apace, From light of sacred Countenance! afar From golden regions, where the righteous are, Sooth'd in pure Peace's lap eterne, whose wing Towers high above them, overshadowing; While happy showers of nectar sweet imbue Their lips, as with an everlasting dew. The wicked so His watchful ire will learn, And cower 'neath God's avenging countenance stern; The righteous so His love divine will feel With gentle lapse into their bosom steal. O come; whatever fears Thy standards carry, Or sorrows summon us, Lord, do not tarry. Come, Lord; though labouring heaven whirl from its place, And its perplexed paths no more can trace; Though sympathising earth astonied reel, And nature jarred cease its round to wheel. Come, Lord; though sun refuse with rosy beam To rise, and sickly drives a doubtful team. Come, Lord; though moon look more aghast at night Than when her cheeks with panic fear are white; Though ominous comets through the dolorous air Hurtle, and round their brow dread fire-wreaths wear; Though spite of struggling sun Night's sudden sway Impious and lawless seize the accustom'd day; Mistimed Day, mindless of eastern glow, Through moanings of forsaken Night should go. Come, Lord; though father Ocean roars and lowers, That his mov'd mountain-bars own other powers. Come, Lord; whate'er Fear dares, e'en let it dare; Let Fates do what they will, be Thou but there. Come, Lord; with whate'er recompense of ill, Whate'er Thy coming cost, O come, Lord, still. Thee and Thine eyes, O what 'twill be to see! Thee to enjoy e'en so, what will that be! Let come what will, do Thou, Lord, only come. Ah, fierce, fierce knife, which such sweet lilies first Into such cruel roses made to burst; Which first this ivory pure with purple stain'd, And in the white a deeper dye engrain'd. Whatever stream hereafter hence shall flow, Out of this purple fountain-head shall grow. Now first this tender Child Death's talons knows, The Fates and Fury now hurl their first blows. See now His blood begins to pour; and see Scarce blood enough to pour there seems to be. Scarce wise to broach the new wine from the wood, And 'gainst those young limbs call the Furies rude. Wanton, e'en now He girds on woes too much, And arms not to be tried by such soft touch: Wanton, He dares at gentle deaths to play, And for His age to die, as a child may: Wanton, beforehand acts His tragic woe, Restless, refusing in child-step to go. Buskins is this hand shaping for those feet, And does this mind plan threats with coaxings sweet? Such playthings stern does this small hand bespeak, And is it match'd with giant's iron cheek? To mingle cross with cradle, mother's breast With slaughter, wickedness, and rage unblest? His smiling eye now glances at the spear, And turns to arms from soothing mother dear. God, with such face to frown, such eyes to rage! War wins the looks which Love would fain engage. O winsome angers! savage smiles mild brood Soft rage, sweet terror, awe which might be woo'd! Sad wanton forwardness of Child for woes; Harsh rudiments, stern training which He chose! Now scantier wound for scanty body show, And scantier blood for scanty wound let now. Soon, when His strength and deeper draught of breath Shall furnish food luxuriously for Death, 'Twill be His pleasure then full showers to try, Then will He strongly, wholly dare to die. No blood but what to cruel use will grow To Him belongs, or what He can bid flow. Ah, cruel Child, though of all things most mild, Yet to Thyself Thou canst be cruel, Child; To Thyself cruel, but most mild to me; A Lion mild, a pitiless Lamb here see. Long, long may this stern praise Thine honour lift, A faculty for woes and innate gift. Fierce knife, from which experience sharp He borrows, While the Child hastes to grow the Man of Sorrows; Fierce knife, 'neath which Thou draw'st Thy golden breath, Advancing as 'twere 'neath the rod of Death. Not, not too much, Virgin, to plaints give way; Nor will, nor can, thy Son long from thee stay. Why should He? Where so love to be carest? What could prevent His nestling in thy breast? What lips more suited to those cheeks divine? What hand to clasp that neck more fit than thine? What could He hope more clinging than these arms? Or what embraces e'er possess such charms? What kindlier vine its tender elm around Could twine, in mutual folds e'en dying found? To whom with sudden arms more eager go? Who on this face such yearning glances throw? Where 'mid such quick-rain'd kisses could He wake?' Whence His prest cheek a nobler ruby take? Where could that grape ripen in airs more mild, Or hang 'neath hills where suns so sweetly smil'd? Where could such grateful languor o'er Him creep, Or what more soothing murmur lull to sleep? Where could He reign in nook so chaste, so dear, As in this Mother's, Virgin's bosom here? Could He fly hence, and such blest joys decline, And could He help hastening to breast of thine? This balmy bosom's heritage not share, Of such delights so easily made heir? Nay, Lady, nay; thy loud complainings stay; Be cheer'd: this is no Love that flies away. To arms, ye starry chieftains all, who lead The youth of heaven to war to arms, with speed! Let each right-hand its untried arrows grasp, Or its own fiercely-gleaming falchion clasp. He is all here, and mightier in his wrath, The Dragon brings all powers the Dragon hath: Strange forms, curst children of the deepest Night What dusky gods he marshals to the fight! Now he makes ready, fights now, fierce as hell! Scarce could I say 'He fights,' when, lo, he fell. Ah, 'twas too much to scar with wrath these faces, And leave on angel-cheeks such furrow'd traces. 'Tis his grim boast and proudly-swelling fate, That of a great crime e'en the end was great: If vanquish'd, that 'twas no mean victory; Much bolted thunder there requir'd to be; That with these words his fiery pains he charms: 'Arms I bore vainly; but I did bear arms.' Dost thou lament that life, urg'd-on too quickly, Rolls round its course in hasting revolution? Dost blame the thrifty gods, when thou thyself art Lavish of lifetime? What thyself wastest, mourn'st thou if it perish? Dost drive it from thee, but deplore it going? Is life thy servant? Sooth, a very servant Turn'd off departeth. Life's stream is fleeting I confess it always; But once let Pleasure yield an easy incline, With headlong wave and with more fleeting current Onward it glideth. Sleep, the thief, closing drowsy eyelids, snatcheth One mighty portion; while as large a portion Pleasure, the robber, carries off unchalleng'd Time's precious gold-dust. Thou for thyself a thousand deaths createst; And the more lifetimes thou dost spend in folly, So many more in lieu of them demandest; Wasting and wanting. Good speed ye made, in sooth, good speed, ye blest, And by a shorter course won heavenly rest; Over a narrow sea of your own blood Death's bark has borne you, by few gales withstood: While with slow oars we toil the shore to gain, Through boisterous fury of the boundless main. We are Death's pastime and his wanton play; O'er time and age and wide waves we are blown, Expos'd to furies and to chances thrown. Wretched in full are we, perish at length; Fates seek us out, and try on us their strength. We are Fate's skill, Evils' ambition fine, Death's utmost effort and deep-plann'd design. In a long life wide field for Death there lies; In a short life grand deeds may daze men's eyes. By years we live we reckon not our life; Our life is short, with great deeds be it rife. To spend long years, let not long life be thought; A long-liv'd deed oft in short life is wrought. God not so much contracted your life's space, As order'd Death the sooner to give place. What earth's life loses, gains the life on high: By how much sooner, so much less we die. Hail, goddess Hope! Who Fate remorseless movest Far off, and canst with raging Fortune cope; 'Mid ruin thou our sole salvation provest. A mighty queen, Thy throne on roof-trees lowly And prostrate souls is fix'd, and there are seen The firm foundations of thy kingdom holy. A gladsome hymn From fetters disengaging, And joy from grief, thou liv'st in bosom dim, A spark that laughs at tempests wildly raging. A crown to slaves; Abundance to the needy; To shipwreck'd men a refuge from the waves; To conquer'd and condemn'd deliverance speedy. An 'Anchor sure,' The eternal Rock thou graspest, The strain of ocean 'stedfast' to endure; And Heaven's calm joys 'within the veil' thou claspest. Nay, I thy child, Dependent here adore thee: From thee I draw my life, O Mother mild; Open thy fostering bosom, I implore thee. Behold thy stones! more precious nought is seen, Whether they deck with precious rays serene Thy head, or from it take a precious glow. This is your style of diadem; e'en so With crowned locks 'tis seemly ye should go: The viler in itself each stone may seem, A richer gem upon thy head will gleam. Behold the Book where, seen through mist of tears, A sacred form in manhood's bloom appears. Ah, you will say, when you behold this face, Such looks, O such, our father us'd to grace. The accustom'd sounds you hope for holy thunder, And the blest honey hid that sweet tongue under: So, o'er his pen, you say, that hand was bent, When her own wings to fetter'd Fame he lent. Such was that breast, his spirit's lofty dwelling That breast with its own starry thoughts high swelling. O pleasing fantasies of picture fair, And kindred forms which laboured brass may bear! Since through thee, Sire, such countless writings live, Life unto thee let this one writing give. I am all-fair, yet no one loveth Me: Noble, yet no one would My servant be: Rich, yet no suppliant at My gate appears: Almighty, yet before Me no one fears: Eternal, I by very few am sought: Wise am I, yet My counsel goes for nought: I am the Way, yet by Me walks scarce one: The Truth, why am I not relied upon? The Life, yet seldom one My help requires: The True Light, yet to see Me none desires: And I am merciful, yet none is known To place his confidence in Me alone. Man, if thou perish, 'tis that thou dost choose it; Salvation I have wrought for thee, O use it! What art thou? What new device, Globe, chance-fashion'd in a trice, Into brief existence bounding, Perfectly thy circle rounding? As when Cypris, her breast smiting Virgin still, all love inviting Cypris in young loveliness Couch'd rosy where the white waves press Her to bear and her to bless; Gleamest thou ineffable! Springing up with graceful bound And describing dainty round; Thousand colours come and go As thou dost thy fair curves show, Swelling out a whirling ball Through whose sides of shifting hue, Through whose smooth-turn'd globe, we view Iris' gliding rainbow sitting, In a hundred forms soft-flitting: And semblance of a troop displaying, All around dominion swaying: And the Goddess volatile With witching step and luring smile Follows still with twinkling foot In link'd mazes involute: With many a sight-deceiving turn And flight which makes pursuers burn, And a graceful hesitation Only treacherous simulation: JUST SO, and no less deceiving, Our BUBBLE, all its colours weaving, Follows ever-varying courses, Or in air itself disperses: Here now, there now, coming, going, Wand'ring as if ebbing, flowing: Sporting Passion's colours all In ways that are bacchanal; And the GLOBES undisciplin'd As though driven by the wind, Borne along the fleeting plains Light as air; nor order reigns But the heaven-possess'd array Moving each in its own way, Hither now and thither flying, Glancing, wavering, and dying, Losing still their path and finding, In a random inter-winding: Rising, falling, on careering, Vis'ble now, now disappearing; Living wand'ring streams outgoing, Ev'n Confusion beauteous showing: Flowing not each in its course, But each to other joining force; Moving in pleasant pastime still In a mutual good-will: And a nearness that's so near You the contact almost fear, Yet so finely drawn to eye In its delicate subtlety That the procession, blossom-fair, Nowhere has direction clear: Nor with their own aspect glance, But in the sweet luxuriance Which skiey influences lend, As in new windings on they trend: Throwing off the stol'n sunlight In a flood of blossoms bright, Scatter'd on the fields of light; Such a brilliancy of bloom As all may share if all will come. Now golden Spring advances lightly, Spreading itself on all sides brightly, Out of its rich and full supply Open-handed, lavishly. Since all colours you discern, No one colour may you learn: All tints melted into one In a sweet confusion, You cannot tell 'tis that or this, So shifting is the loveliness: Gleams as of the peacock's crest, Or such as on dove's neck rest; Opal, edg'd with amethyst, Or the sunset's purpl'd mist, Or the splendour that there lies In a maiden's azure eyes, Kindling in a sweet surprise: Flower-tints, shell-tints, tender-dy'd, Save to curious unespied: Lo, one BUBBLE follows t'other, Differing still from its frail brother, Striking still from change to change With a quick and vivid range. There in the contiguous wave Torches palely-glist'ning lave; Here what delicate love-lights shine! Through them near flames bick'ring shine. Matching flushing of the rose, As the ruddy channel flows: Milky rivers in white tide Lucent, hush, still onwards glide: Purple rivers in high flood Red as is man's awful blood: Corn-fields smiling goldenly Meet the blue laugh of the sea: Mist-clouds sailing on their way Darken the changeful cheeks of Day: And beneath vine-clusters red Lilies are transfigured: Here you mark as 'twere the snows Folding o'er the neighb'ring rose; Snow into blown roses flushing, Roses wearied of their blushing, As the shifting tints embrace, And their course you scarce can trace; Now retiring, now advancing, Now in wanton mazes dancing; Now a flow'ry red appears, Now a purpl'd green careers. All the signs in heaven that burn Where the gliding wheel doth turn, Here in radiant courses go, As though 'twere a heaven below: The sky's mazes involute Circling onward with deft foot, Sphere on heavenly sphere attending, Coming, going, inter-blending: And the gold-fleec'd flocks of air Wand'ring inviolate and fair; Flocks that drink in chaste delight Dewy pastures of the Night, Leaving no trace of foot or bite. Whate'er of change above you note, As these clouds o'er heaven float, Lo, repeated here we see In a sportive mimicry. Here the tiny tender world Within its own brightness furl'd Wavers, as in fairy robe 'Twere a belted lined globe. Lights as of the breaking Day Tremble with iridescent play, But now swiftly upward going, Evanescent colours showing, In some nook their beams concealing, Nor their wantonness revealing. O, what store of wonders here In this short-liv'd slender SPHERE! For all wonders I have told Are within its GLOBE enroll'd: Not such globe as skilled he Fashion'd of old in Sicily: Brighter e'en than crystals are, And than crystal frailer far. For a flitting breath design'd; I am Blossom born of air; I'm of Ocean, guiding Star; I'm a golden sport of Nature, Frolic stamp'd on ev'ry feature: I'm a myth, an idle theme, The brief substance of a dream: Grace and grief of trifles, I Charm a well-skill'd vanity; Begotten of the treacherous breeze, Parent of absurdities: Yet, a drop or mote, at best, Favour'd more than are the rest. I'm price of Hope that no more is, Beauty's casket, doating eye Of lovers blinded wilfully: The light Spirit of Vanity. I am Fortune's looking-glass, The countersign which she doth pass To her troop of warriors: I'm the oath by which she swears, And wherewith she doth induce Men to trust a fragile truce. Charming, provoking, still astray, Fair and elegant and gay, Trim and fresh and blossom-hu'd; Interchangeably imbu'd With rosy-red and the snow's whiteness, Air and water and fire's brightness: Painted, gemm'd, of golden dye, NOTHING after all am I!' If now, O gentle Reader, it appear Irksome my BUBBLE'S chatterings to hear; If on it frowning, 'Words, words, words!' thou say, No more I'll chatter, but at once obey. So, turn thine eye, my Friend, no more give heed; My BUBBLE lives but if thou choose to read. Cease thou to read, and I resign my breath; Cease thou to read, and that will be my death. The time of the singing of birds is come; I will away i' the greenwood to roam; I will away; and thou azure-ey'd Muse Deign with thy gifts my mind to suffuse. So o'erheard I one say, as he withdrew To a fairy scene that well I knew, Light lac'd with shadow, shadow with light, Leaves playing bo-peep from morn unto night. But, ah, what is this? Alas, and alas, A sweet bird flutters upon the grass; Flutters and struggles with quivering wing! Tempted and snar'd gentle, guileless thing. Vain, vain thy struggles; for, lo, a hand Hollow'd above, makes thee captive stand. Home hies the Captor, loud singing his joy; He has got a pet song-bird for his boy. Now twining and twisting, a cage he makes Wire-wrought and fast'n'd. Ah, my heart aches! It is a prison, for the poor bird prepar'd; Shut close and netted, netted and barr'd. Comes the flutter and gleam of forest-leaves Through the trellis'd window under the eaves; Comes the breath and stir of the vernal wind, Comes the goldening sunshine to remind Of all that is lost; comes now and again Far off a song from the blading grain; Calling, still calling the Songster to come Back once more back to its woodland home. I mark eyelids rise; mark the lifting wing; Mark the swelling throat, as if it would sing; Mark the weary 'chirp, chirp,' like infant's cry, Yearning after the free and boundless sky; For the grand old woods; once more to sit On the swinging bough into blossom smit. Vain, vain, poor bird! thou'rt captive still; Thou must bend thee to thy Captor's will: Thy wing is cut; from thy mate thou'rt taken; All alone thou abidest, sad, forsaken. The days pass on; and I look in once more On the captive bird 'bove the ivied door. Sweetly it sings, as if all by itself, A short, quiet song. O thou silly elf, Hast forgot the greenwood, the forest hoar, The flash of the sky, the wind's soften'd roar? Hast forgot that thou still a captive art, Prison'd in wire-work? hast forgot thy smart? 'Tis even so: for now down, and now up, Now hopping on perch, now sipping from cup, I mark it sullen and pining no more, But keeping within, though open the door. List ye, now list from its swelling throat, Of its woodland song you miss never a note. Alone, it is true, and in a wir'd cage; But kindness has melted the captive's rage. Behold a sweet meaning in this bird's story How the child of God is ripen'd for glory: For it is thus with the child of God, Smitten and bleeding 'neath His rod: Thus 'tis with him; for, tranquil and calm 'Mid dangers and insults, he singeth his psalm: Alone, all alone, deserted of man, Slander'd and trampl'd and plac'd under ban, He frets not, he pines not, he plains not still, But sees clear in all his dear Father's will: Come loss, come cross, come bereavement, come wrong, He sets all to music, turns all to song; Come terror, come trial, come dark day, come bright, Still upward he looks, and knows all is right: Wounded, he sees the Hand gives the stroke, Bending his neck to bear his Lord's yoke, And finds it grow light, by grace from Above, As love's slender collars o' the Queen of Love; Comes the starting tear, 'tis dried with a smile; Comes a cloud, as you look 'tis gone the while; Stirs the 'old Adam' to tempt and to dare, He thinks Who was tempted and knows what we are; Gentle and meek, murmurs not nor rebels, But serene as in heaven and tranquil dwells: And so the Believer has 'songs in the night,' And so every cloud has a lining of light. Thus, even thus, the captive bird's story Tells how a soul is ripen'd for glory. Losses are often source of secret gain, Delays good-speed, and ease the child of pain. The subtle snake, laying aside her fears, Casts off her slough, and heals the waste of years. The phoenix thus her waning pride supplies, And, to be ever-living, often dies; Bold for her good, she makes the fires her friend, And to begin anew, will plot her end. What skilful losing! what wise use of dying! What trust in flames! and what a craft in plying That trick of immolation! Canst thou so Compound with griefs? canst wisely undergo Life's losses, crosses? play with gainful doom? Canst, to be quicken'd, gladly seek the tomb? Thrice-happy he thus touch'd with healing sorrow, For whom night's strife plots but a gracious morrow. Suff'ring is not always loss; Often underneath the cross Heavy, crushing, wearing, slow, Causing us in dread to go All unsuspected lieth gain, Like sunshine in vernal rain. Lo, the serpent's mottled skin Cast, new lease of years doth win: Lo, the phoenix in the fire Leaps immortal from its pyre, The mystic plumage mewing, And life by death renewing. What a wise loss thus to lose! Who will gainsay or abuse? What strange end to fun'ral pile, Thus in Death's gaunt face to smile! Faith still strong within the fire, Faith triumphant o'er its ire. How stands it, fellow-man, with thee? What meaning in this myth dost see? Happy thou, if when thou'rt lying On thy sick-bed slow a-dying, Cometh vision of the Eternal, Cometh strength for the supernal, Cometh triumph o'er the infernal; And thou canst the Last Enemy Calmly meet, serenely die; The hard Sisters life's web snipping, But thy spirit never gripping; Good, not evil, to thee bringing; Hushing not thy upward singing, To the Golden City winging. Even so to die is gain, Like the Harvest's tawnied grain: Suffering is not always loss; The Crown succeeds the Cross. O Life, or but some evanescent madness And glittering spoil of life snatch'd with blind gladness! Of endless Error, transitory guest; Sad human Error, which would fain find rest. O certain Error, 'neath uncertain sky Suspending here our frail mortality; Leading us through a thousand devious ways And intricacies of a treacherous maze! Our staggering footsteps how dost thou beguile Through wanton rounds of unavailing toil, And our entangl'd days to nothing bring! O fates, how much of our poor life takes wing, Wasted on winds and shadows! On life's stage Shadows and winds a serious part engage, The scene confusing. On life's billow tost, The sport of changeful tide, we're well-nigh lost, And, like a frail boat on a stormy sea, We waver up and down uncertainly. Nay, e'en the threads spun by the Fates on high, As with stern fingers they divinely ply The web of life, twine round us as we go, And draw us backwards, forwards, to and fro; Till Ruin trips us up, and we are found Helpless and weary, stretched along the ground. Happy the man who, welcoming each day With smiles that answer to its fleeting ray, Pursues with step serene his purpos'd way; The alluring snares peculiar to the age His life with peaceful tenor glides along, By fav'ring breezes fann'd, and sooth'd with song; Inspir'd by Heaven with soul-sustaining force, Seldom he falls, or falters in his course; But ever, as the eddying years roll round, Bursting through all the perils that abound, A wise assertor of himself is found. Grief for work his hands have done Happy reach of art! yet he The artificer, unhappily, He feels the wounds: what deals the blow? Can it be true? can flames from gelid marble flow? Marble, treacherous and to blame To burn your Sculptor with such flame! What madness in his heart is hid? He wonders at, he adores the work he did. First he made, and next his hand With wandering fingers softly tries The mystery to understand. Ah, surely now the hard flesh lies! Is it a living maiden, see! O treacherous blisses! Is it no marble? can it frail flesh be? Does it return his kisses? He knows not, he. He doubts, he fears, he prays; what mean All these sweet blandishments between? Venus, wretched Sculptor, wills You should suffer these sad ills; This is her triumph over you, Because at love your lips would curl; Your will not living overthrows yet this dead girl. Weep, ah, weep, Pygmalion! Though you shap'd her with your hands, With your chisel, out of stone, Not innocuous here she stands. O image of a maiden! If you so strangely baneful prove, With what despair will you come laden, Coming alive to claim his love! Pygmalion mourns his own success; Was ever such strange wretchedness? His work itself, a work of Art, Perfect in its every part; But himself? Alas, artist he Of his own utmost misery. He feels his wounds, but who shall tell Whence come the drops that downward steal? Flames leap out from the marble, cold As ice itself by storm-wind roll'd: And he, contriver of that fire, Burns self-immolate on his own pyre; Furies of his own genius born Cast him, adoring and forlorn, Into a strange captivity Before his own hands' work; and he Clings to the shapely form, until, In ecstasy of love a-thrill, He burning lips to cold lips sets, And wild with passion her cheek wets; Strains to his breast insensate stone, As 'twere a breathing thing; with moan, With clasp and grasp and tingling touch, As though he ne'er could grip too much; And wilder'd cry of agony, That she respond would; by him lie A virgin pure as drifted snow, Or lilies that i' the meadows blow. Is it ivory? is it stone? Lives it? or is it clay alone? O that to flesh the stone would melt, And show a soul within it dwelt! He looks, he yearns, he sighs, he sobs, Convulsive his whole body throbs; He doubts, he fears, he supplicates With wistful gaze; he on her waits; Gifts lavish he lays at her feet, And, stung to passion, will entreat, As though the image he has made Were thing of life he might persuade Persuade and woo, and on her stake His future, all. O sad mistake! For thee, Pygmalion, Venus sends These triumphs which thy chisel lends, To punish thee, for that no love Erewhile thy obstinate heart might move. Why flee'st thou the living, say, When this image thee doth slay? Thee doth ay, slay! Why dost thou stand Entranc'd before the work o' thy hand, None the less hurtful that it is Thine own genius yields the bliss? Venus must thee still deny; The sculptured maid must breathless lie. Never since ship was set a-float Have men seen so strange a boat: Alive it is from deck to keel, Having the gray gleam of steel; Slippery as wave-wash'd wreck, Or as a war-ship's bloody deck. A Dolphin, lo, its huge back bending, Safety to Arion lending From the sailors of Sicily, Covetous of his golden monie; Money that as prize he had won Before all Singers aneath the sun; Playing and singing so famouslie, Singing and playing so wondrouslie, That there went up from ev'ry throat The verdict, 'for Arion I vote:' Vote the prize; and gifts as well, Crowns of gold and of asphodel; Lyres all a-glow with gems, A thousand golden pieces and one For the gifted son of Poseidon: And, hark, as 'twere the bellowing thunder, In clang'rous shouts men tell their wonder. Arion now homeward takes his way In a fair ship steer'd for Corinth Bay; Proud of his prizes, proud of his skill, Proud that soon Periander will Welcome him fondly, and call him friend, With words such as no money can send. Alas and alas, such crime to tell! The ship-captain and sailors fell Covet his gold, and have it must, Though Arion they murder by blow or thrust. But Apollo at midnight hour Sendeth a dream in mystic power; It showeth the men, it showeth their crime. Arion awakes with the morning's chime; Awakes, and planneth how to escape. Vain, vain all; on him they gape, Thirsting alike for gold and life, Murder and covetousness at strife. 'Suffer me, then,' Arion said, 'That I may play as I have play'd; Here is my poor Lyre, and, ere I die, Let me prove its minstrelsy.' He has donn'd him now in gay attire, Festal robes; in his hand his Lyre. List ye, list ye; above, below, Sounds such as only the angels know; Sounds that are born of rapture and bliss, Of the throbbing heart and the burning love-kiss. Now it is soft, pathetic, low, Then 'gins to change to cry of woe; Now it comes rushing as if the thunder Came booming from the deep earth under; Pulsing along each quivering string As though the Lyre were a living thing, And Arion's hand had so cunning a spell As should win all heaven ay and hell. O, came there never such melodie From mortal earth or mortal sky. He mounted to the good ship's prow, And mingling with his song a vow To the gods, he himself threw Out 'mid the waves from that damnable crew. Up through the waves the Dolphins bound, A hundred bended backs are found, Each one more eager than the rest To upbear the sweet Player on Ocean's breast. Arion ascends; and, lo, he stands, His Lyre unwet within his hands: Onward and onward careering they go; O soft and true the notes that flow! Rising, falling, swelling, dying, Near and nearer, far-off flying; Pulsing along each quivering string As though the Lyre were a living thing. New is the ship, as new the freight; The Dolphin feels never the weight; New is the ship, and new the fare, That of the water, this of the air: The sailors in their greed him lost, The Dolphin bears him withouten cost. Away and away with a shim'ring track Arion goes on the Dolphin's back; Away and away, still softly playing, Each string his lightest touch obeying. Under the spell the Sea grows calm, Listing attent his witching psalm; Under the spell the air grows mild, Breathing soft as sleeping child. But who may seek all the tale to tell? It is a tale unspeakable. Onward and onward careering they go, Silence above and silence below: The Storm-gale shuts its mouth and lists, The Wind folds its pinions and desists, Following, not blowing, drawing not, but drawn, From early ev'ning to breaking dawn. Tenarus at last Arion beheld; Tenarus, his own dear home that held; And as together they swiftly come, He claps hands loud and thinks of home. The Dolphin seeks a quiet cove; The Dolphin arching its back above The azure waters, leaves him there, A-list'ning still his Lyre to hear. Homeward to Corinth Arion proceeds: Periander a tale of suff'ring reads In the thinned cheek and the dreamy eye, In the tremulous words and the laden sigh. The story is told. O story of wrong! The ship returns; and it is not long Ere captain and crew, at bar arraign'd, Must tell where Arion they detain'd. 'He tarries,' quoth they, 'in Sicily, Winning all men by his minstrelsie.' Lies were proven in their throat. Periander his hands together smote, Swearing a solemn oath that they One, all should drown'd be in the Bay. Tied hand and foot, pallor'd and grim, 'Tis done as they would ha' done to him. A plunge as of a plunging stone, A few bubbles Vengeance is done! Cupid, foolishest of pets, What woe thy swift-sent flame begets! Surely before the flashing Sun Torches pale to extinction? But our torch is mightier far; It able is 'gainst fire to war, Yea, fire itself to burn and char. The igni-potent in amaze, Lo, groans, his huge heart all a-blaze With keener flame than his own rays. Ah, what is this? Apollo burns, And as distraught in anguish mourns. Lo, see his lyre mute and unstrung, Or only grief-notes from it wrung: Lo, his golden locks neglected, And his radiant face dejected; Beauty eterne distain'd, rejected. The great Sun-god is in love, And seeks in vain his Fair to move: Hence his weird pallor, and those cries That the sky shudd'ring terrifies; Hence the world's day-bringing eye Tears dim, such as in mortals' lie; Hence those showers often falling, The Sea her erst gifts recalling; Hence welcome the approaching night, That mourning he may veil his light Veil his light, and in shadows deep His great anguish in secret weep. Nor, when vermeil-draped Morning, With her smile the East adorning, Touches with her rosy finger Eyes that 'neath their lashes linger, Seeking to wake the God of Day, That round the world his beams may play, Does he haste at all to rise To his 'fulgent throne i' the skies; But rather would abide within The clouds whereon he rests his chin; Hating his own beams' splendour now, Since Daphne scorns to list his vow: Thus he lingers, and still weighs Whether Day or Night to raise. Raging grief he cannot smother, Says the one; and Love the other. Cupid, tricksiest of pets, What woe thy swift-sent flame begets! The walls of Troy the walls of Troy! 'Tis an old tale you will enjoy: A foe is there amid the fire, A foe 'twixt foemen in their ire. Aeneas takes a pious load With upward prayer to his god; E'en his old father, whose gray head Lay 'mong the dying and the dead: O venerable spoil in truth, Fit from the demons to fetch ruth. Fierce roar the flames, and fiercer still Rages the fight on plain and hill. 'Spare the old man,' Aeneas cries; 'Spare the white hairs; or if he dies, Be mine the privilege of his pyre; Be mine with him at once t'expire.' Scarcely are the true words spoken, When through line of battle broken Swift he passes; and this brave son His father bears in triumph on; Reck'ning that he a trophy has That the conquerors' doth surpass. He safely goes: for, lo, amaz'd, The foe upon them wistful gaz'd: The conquerors the conquer'd are By filial love so strong, so fair. The flames Troy willingly receives, Jubilant that the old man lives; Welcomes the torches, that the night May not conceal this deed of light. All praise to thee, high-hearted son! Thou an undying name hast won: The debt of love thou hast repaid Unto thy father, who is made Thy debtor now; for life he gave, And thou in turn his life dost save. Happy the son whom thus we see Father of his own sire to be. Phoenix, nursling of Death, How wondrous is thy birth! Thou gainest not thy breath I' nest, like birds of Earth: 'Mid fire all flaming hot Thou strangely art begot; The leaping flames thee cherish When thou seem'st to perish. Lo, Death thy midwife is; Lo, thyself thou bearest. O tell me how is this, That mystery thou preparest? Thou mother of thyself! Thou daughter of thyself! When thy 'pointed hour is done, Thou an od'rous nest entwinest; And, as for thy destruction, Thou 'midst its fires reclinest. Most surely thou'rt consum'd; Most surely thou'rt relum'd. O fruitful Death! O gainful Death! Live then, self-contained bird; Most pleasing wonder. The old legend is absurd; But truth lies under. Ye that still, serene in peace, Lying in the lap of ease, Believe the hopes of golden youth, And have not heard the bitter truth, How shining suns fade at a breath; Ye, with little dread of death, Or fear of chains and iron night Of man's last prison, or the sight Of gloomy Dis; that think to keep Old age away, look here, and weep. Here, to this one narrow room, A thousand joys and hopes have come; Here bright minutes many a one Have a lasting night put on: Youth's torch, that flash'd such light about, Is in the Stygian wave put out. Then, if you grudge poor grief a tear, Heave, at least, a sigh for fear. Whoe'er ye be, upgazing here, Calm, unruffl'd, without tear; Joyous in your golden prime, And unwitting of the time When shall pale Life's glowing sun, And the web of years be spun; Thinking not o' the iron night Where grim Pluto reigns in might; Thinking not of the nether world, With its clanking chains; Whither damned souls are hurl'd When the Judge arraigns; Seeing old age far away; Making Life one holiday; Here perceive that Grief shall yet Your ruddy cheeks with sorrow wet; Here musing upon this poor stone, Ye may learn prevention. This Earth, what is it but a home Fugitive as sea-wave's foam? Mark where breaks the whit'n'd wave 'Mid the cliffs an arched cave; Light and shadow play within, Flick'ring o'er its walls; In the gloom with Hell akin A dull stream slowly crawls. E'en such is Life, how bright soe'er, Hope and Joy lure to Despair; And Life's stream goes plunging down Into dark drear Acheron; Youth's bright torch extinguish'd quite; Golden Day exchang'd for Night: To long night of changeless woe Swift the Christless souls shall go. Shun not therefore in thy prime, Shun not whilst thou art in Time, Tears of penitence over sin; Or bitterly shalt thou rue, When Death shall fling his javelin, And Hell's prison thee immew. Bethink thee in thy golden prime; Bethink thee whilst thou'rt yet in Time. Flow, flow, my tears; I stay you not; but pray To my unhappy voice close not the way. My plaintive griefs with words, O let me move; To say, 'Alas, he died!' allow my love. Lo, they say, no the rebel tears say, no! And with unconquer'd headlong torrent flow. Wouldst thou, O dear one, that our silence speak? Mute love with ceaseless sob moisten our cheek? It shall; and still thine urn drink its own dews, And never its own faithful waters lose. Meanwhile let no one think a wonder wrought, If real tears to speak could not be taught. What god? or who was it? I ask, contriv'd Thee, O Woman, evil Woman? who conniv'd Together who in this supremest crime Of the divinities, before old Time Was born? Alas, most dire calamity As e'er has come upon humanity! Whence was the hand, ye Powers, so evil-skill'd In sin and mischief, so perversely will'd To curse this world of ours? But hold! I blunder; I must to the dark regions lying under, Ev'n Hell, descend. Not Thee, O God above, For Thou art pitiful, for Thou art Love: Not one of all the gracious Pow'rs supernal; But ye, O Furies, from the pit infernal, Ye, ye the work devis'd, matur'd, achiev'd, And brought to Man; to Man frail Man! deceiv'd: Ho, hosts of evil! ho! on you I call: Behold your offspring diabolical. Does it a blush raise? Spirits of evil, speak! Such as expos'd crime brings to mortal cheek? Lo, these your works yourselves surpass, I wis; Clap hands, ye potentates of the Abyss. Rulers of Erebus, is it not a wonder, Worthy of Hell's most resonant swift thunder, That ye such thing contrived have as Heaven Never cast out, nor e'er to Hell was driven? Take ye your praise, your praise; this work o' your hands Absolute in mischief 'bove compar'son stands. Or if ye silent be, your work will speak Your praise. Ha, ha! what mean ye that ye shriek Thus as I meditate with pulse of fear Upon this monster, Woman? Ah, 'tis clear; I see your guile and skill. The gods above Would have all ills within one scant breast move! To bed, Pluto, king of the nether world; Sleep on in peace; be every banner furl'd; Ye fires, go out; Man's ruin is complete; No need of you in Woman all woes meet: In her, ye devils, ye have so contriv'd That Tempter, who better than had ye div'd To furthest Tartarus Man's protecting wall Shall breach. Earth's fury Woman passes all! Alas, how brief and grudg'd our Spring! Ah, flow'ry days how vanishing! E'en so ye hasten on and on With an unceasing motion. And thou, sweet Beauty, brightly flashing, But all too soon thy fairness dashing, To depths of lowest Night must go: Ah, losing there thy hasty glow; Dark'ning mists around thee clinging, And thy loveliness swift-winging: A love that brightens to deceive; A dream-shadow, fugitive. Ye therefore o'er whom Life's young Day Shineth still with golden ray, Seize Fate's harsh distaff makes appeal, And hoary Time's quick-whirling wheel, As round and round the circle spins, And to furthest distance wins Seize ye the gliding seasons fleet, And dews of vernal Phosphor sweet, And new-blown flowers' brightness meet. O, what to tender loves ye owe, Waste not on Chaos dark below, Where pallid ghosts dim-gleaming go. Though, Beauty, on thy starry cheeks, Where snow's white pureness ever breaks, And where gazing, we see born Roses fresh without all thorn, Buds intertwining undefil'd, Spotless as e'er a grace-born child: Though thou with everlasting faith Fosterest with thy nectar'd breath Myriad Loves, and dost them feed With honey'd feast of heavenly mead In gentle draughts; and they roam round In thy realms, and aye are found Surfeiting themselves with play In one amorous holiday; Happy in the drenching dew, And seeking ever to renew Their torch-flames at thy fair eyes, And whet blunt arrows' ecstasies With sweet juice that in honey lies: And so, with their flame relumed, Deftly hover, airy-plumed; Waving higher still and higher Their torches that raise soft desire; Menacing the very stars, Yea the old heavens i' their wars: Although beneath thy high-arch'd brow Sits Majesty, nor doth allow To wanton loves such liberty As mocks the Ruler of the sky; But in their wild career gives pause, Imposing on them Love's sweet laws: Though thy whole frame in every part Sets forth the sky as in a chart; Though thy fair face in every look Shows heaven in page of living book; To Earth reveals the starry skies In the bright glances of thine eyes: Yet, alas, on these fair cheeks, Where the rose all-blushing speaks, There shall come the snow's sad whiteness, And the red, heart-breaking brightness: On the 'human face divine,' That as a star doth radiant shine, There shall come the deep'ning shadow, As clouds across the dappl'd meadow. On the high state of the brow To-morrow Death may make his blow; And all of Nature's bravery Gone, in the Grave's cavern lie. Alas, the fairest is the fleetest! Alas, how short-liv'd is the sweetest! Alas, the richest is the rarest! Alas, that Death doth spoil the fairest! Be thou, sweet Venus, present now, Whilst at thy sacred rites we vow; Smile, Venus, with the smile that charms When Mars enfolds thee in his arms, O'ercome with glance as sunshine golden, Renowned from the ages olden. Smile; then Phoebus' flame shall fail, Nor Phoebe her own darts avail. Thy Cupid only against thee Wields successful weaponry. Oft and oft the laughing Boy In the wildness of his joy Has slipt into Diana's quiver His keen arrows, that a shiver Pleasant-painful send through all, When he, trickster, doth enthral. Yea, he has dar'd the Lord of Fire With flames more burning, in his ire. The arm-link'd Virgins to thee pray, Seeking thou wouldst near them stay; Were it but to offer here, In the flock that hovers near, More doves and sparrows lightly-flying: To their prayer there's no denying. Lo, they dedicate in posies All their lips supply of roses; All their necks, of lilies, white As the dewy stainless light; Yea, the whole Spring of each cheek, And that which from their eyes doth break. Hence, Venus, arms thou mayest take For thy wanton Boy to make Arrows from their fire-darting eyes, Or torches flame-tipp'd that surprise With Love's delicious agonies. Take them, and see thou lett'st them know What means a 'mistress;' and then show What the Night all-wakeful is In the rapture of its bliss; What the bold lover shall demand When all charms he doth command. Take them: by all the hearts that burn, And passionate unto thee turn! By all the mysteries that are breath'd, Or in thine own girdle sheath'd! By all to thee Adonis e'er Or said or did, when he would swear, Ne'er i' the world was one so fair! The time is come, when, lord of milder hours, The Sun, ascending fresh with larger powers, Is wont to woo and soothe the purple Day, And, brilliant with its beaming vernal ray, To climb with face august the heavenly way; All Nature's love, Earth's hope and glory golden, To which for garlands virgins are beholden. With a glad plenty of all living things Sweet tender Spring approaches on soft wings. The Year, more beauteous now with offspring new, And crown'd with Youth's fresh flowers of every hue, Delicious odours pours from happy breast, Of fragrant progeny the parent blest: O'er verdant fields, blue waters, everywhere, At his own wealth he wonders, large and fair. By her own Zephyr thirsty Earth unbound Drinks eagerly the showers which fall all round; While Flora, sitting where tall trees appear, Lists, O how happily! as, murmuring near, A father-fountain chides its gliding waters, Which with curl'd head alas, unduteous daughters Only look back, and then a garrulous band Pursue their laughing way o'er all the land; Lists how the sighing, oft-returning air Soft prattles to the leafy tresses fair; With what sweet whispers it accosts the tree, Which with bow'd head makes answer murmuringly; Lists, lists again, while through the mournful shade Sad Philomel's pathetic plaint is made. Now chiefly Venus spreads her empire sweet, And calls the world to worship at her feet; Now mightier her soft reins shakes to and fro, Chiding, and makes her chariot faster go; More fiery bids her cestus' powers abound, And her warm swelling bosom girds around; More glorious now, circl'd by Nymphs and Graces, She marches forth, and to her chariot-traces She yokes more swans. Nay, freer than before, Her Loves themselves, the sunny meadows o'er, From her maternal bosom see her pour; A thousand horsemen sweet career around, Ten thousand wanton footmen scour the ground; Part mount the backs of wild beasts as they run, And their own goad-like arrows ply in fun; Part seek wing'd flight to urge with double speed, And so ascend each one an airy steed; One, vaulting on a sparrow, flits away; Here see him lightly shine, there brightly play, In no place long; now resting here, now yonder, Wherever shadows woo them, lo, they wander. One, rising mightier than her heavy reins, His Mother's birds attempts with lighter chains. One, bee-like, brave o'erthrows an angry bee, Only another self in him to see; In tiny circles they awhile revolve, But soon their interlacing flight dissolve. Part, lightly flitting o'er the meadows fair, Strive their own lilies with meet rose to pair. Now flowery tribes in fragrant counsel stand, Amid the buds wantons the joyous band. New glory on their shining pinions rests, A golden harvest settles on their breasts; With sweeten'd locks to odorous shades they go, Their arrows, weapons harsh, away they throw, While other arms their smiling quivers show. Flowers in their hand, flowers in their breast, are seen, On every side appears a flowery sheen. One Love, reclin'd beside a glassy stream, Admires the nature of the illusive gleam, The liquid likeness of his wavering face, And tremulous deceit of imag'd grace. Thence, his own rays examining, he tries And fashions, as the Nymph may chance advise, That braver fires may tremble in his eyes; His mobile face new lightnings flashes far, With rays more wanton, bickering like a star. What wouldest thou? why rolls thy wayward ire? What means that rage of thine dirty and dire? Ah, savage boy, such fury foul forbear, Nor let thy wrath those tragic buttocks tear. Apollo, all indignant, groans and sighs; The Muses flee, and hide them from thine eyes. Thus dost thou seek to sit the sacred steed? Thus to become a horseman fam'd indeed! In such adornment shall he brightly shine? His firm flank lash'd by this base whip of thine? His mouth to this loose bit shall he deliver? O'er his poor mane this filthy fillet quiver? In golden triumph thus shalt thou proceed, So rank a lord bestriding such a steed? Yet foaming with dire rage he does not stand, Nor with hot hoof go thundering o'er the land. Our horse's patience is a wond'rous sight! O, say, what horse before endur'd such wight? Old Pegasus, despising mortal sway, Bellerophon's strong hand disdain'd to obey: And yet with no such rage swells this our horse; Quiet he stands, and holds his wonted course. Nay, though he bore such shame from thee that day, Again he bore thee in a better way! Then to thy shoulders fitly pass'd the blush, Which to thy countenance refus'd to rush. His mother furious raves and wildly splutters A thousand spites, and of the law-courts mutters. Peace, woman! or the law-courts thou wilt awe; Thou dost not leave its own voice to the Law. O fractious eddies of the brandish'd tongue, Such words as in no law-court ever rung. Thy very lawyers from thy thunders hide: Lo, they forget to speak, as stupefied. Thus, thus, foul boy, thy fouled horse's hide By wrangling law-court's tedious strife is plied. While Justice, summon'd to a cause so vile, Views the rank strife obscene with scornful smile. Whatever judge such nasty action tries, See that he blow his nose well, I advise. But why wouldst thou, cruel, tyrannic boy, With thy insulting weight that horse annoy? That sacred steed, will it, then, from thee flee? 'Twill not turn tail, but lend its back to thee! On this vile theme thee we congratulate, O golden Muse, pleasing and delicate; This fair white vileness, Muse, which by its own Or name or face is now no longer known. For, charm'd by thy poetic sacred strain, It knows not, happily, itself again; But with new face wonders at its new splendour For splendid e'en a vile theme thou canst render: Congratulations for vile theme we tender. For had not he , with headlong buttocks base, Gone flashing foully on with thunderous pace, From whence would this avenging plant have sprung, This solemn strain with polish'd music rung? And whence had gather'd these brave angers tender? O Muse, the vilest theme can bring thee splendour, For which congratulations now we render. Thy Hippocrene comes with a fair face, Finely unworthy of its father base; Of a foul fountain so serene a daughter: From dunghill, who would dream such crystal water? Thus rise, O Muse, O rise, a milk-white queen, Out of the midst of vileness rise serene. Even as Venus rising from her spray, When she discover'd to the light of day Her golden limbs, the billowy waves surprising With the first glory of her purple rising; So rise, O Muse, thy milk-white grace unfold; Old Homer in his time made a great feast, And every Poet was thereat a guest: All had their welcome, yet not all one fare; To them above the salt his chiefest care He spread a banquet of choice Poesie, Whereon they fed even to satietie. The lower end had from that end their cates; For Homer, setting open his dung-gates, Delivered from that dresser excrement, Whereon they glutted, and returned in print. Let no man wonder that I this rehearse; Nought came from Homer but it turned to verse. Now where our Author was, at this good cheere, Where was his place, or whether he were there; Whether he waited, or he tooke away, Of this same point I cannot soothly say. But this I ghesse: being then a dandiprat, Some witty Poet took him on his lap, And fed him, from above, with some choice bit. Hence his acumen, and a ready wit. But prayers from a friendly pen ill thrive, And truth's scarce truth, spoke by a relative. Let envy, therefore, give her vote herein: Envy and th' Author sure are nought akin. He personate bad Envy; yet say so, He lickt at Homer's mouth, not from below. Like as a nestling, feather'd gaily o'er, Is meditating towards the stars to soar, And in ambitious flights already vies With the wing'd chiefs that skim along the skies: What though he never has essay'd the air, And needs must trust in plumes untried to bear Unwonted burden heavenward? yet he quivers To stretch his wings, and his fair plumage shivers Round his light shoulders till he flits away, While whispering airs against his pinions play; Nor dreams he will suspend his wandering flight Anywhere short of regions starry bright. But when exhausted by the spaces high And the immeasurable void of sky, Hovering in empty air, far off he sees The fields and hedges and familiar trees O, how far off! which used his sight to please; Then sudden overpower'd behold him sink, And from his hopes and lofty soarings shrink: To his dear mother his whole soul looks back, And down he flutters on the homeward track. In tears once more and sighs of cruel woe Death's tragic stroke repeated bids us go; That fatal hand, which now bears arrows new, Still freshly drips with former crimson dew. Ye whom Fate almost mingl'd in one urn, Whom to be two, close threads forbid discern; Go ye, who equally our sorrows share, By reason of our tears too much a pair; Go where Elysian vales your steps invite, In social paths your happy souls unite; There mix your mighty shades with willing mind, Eternal faith your blended right-hands find. Let common cares be lost in the same joys, While the same happy labour both employs; Through nectar'd hours in talk together range, And night continue the sweet interchange: One tree bear fruit for both, one tree yield shade, On the same turf your pleasant couch be made; Thus how much better will be plainly seen Friendship of Death than that of life, I ween. Ignitum latus et sacrum tibi gratulor ostrum, Upon thy sacred purple, barr'd with fire, I gratulate thee glorious, lov'd attire! For on those shoulders I see Justice shine, And glad to hide within those folds of thine. O finely there she shoots her purple beam, And teaches here her rays brightly to gleam. May Justice thus in pomp eternal go, Here always wish her golden star to glow! Thus blaze, and ne'er thy purple pale its blush, And never need into thy face to flush. From innocent blood ne'er drink a deeper dye, And turn more crimson from such cruelty. Let all fair virtues for thou ownest all Calmly to heaven above thy footsteps call. No widows' tears thy marble halls distil, No house cry out against thee, built by ill; No timber cut for thee its downfall groan, 'Mid its lord's murmurs sadly overthrown. May Fame spread out her wings beneath thy feet, And thee with loud applause her trumpet greet! May incense waft thy name where'er it goes, The happy gale which bears thee bear the rose! Live equal to thy prayers, most just are they, Whatever stars direct thee on thy way, Till this thy purple turn to robe of snow, And where the rose had been, the lily glow! 'The King returns!' the people cry; And shouts of greeting scale the sky. The news sits in each look serene; In each a common joy is seen. Our King! our light! she laughs once more, Glad Anglia, as he gains her shore. Each at the King's eyes lights his eyes; Sees new day with his face arise. You'll ask, what fears beset his way, What ills, what dangers, we're so gay: If 'gainst his bark, that sail'd for home, The faithless billows dar'd to foam; Or if, so seldom blest, you plann'd To keep him still, Iberian land. Nor waves have wrong'd his saintly head, Nor green Iberia felt his tread. Yet think such fancies true love will True love, that feigns false perils still: Us such fears vex, whose hearts are stout True perils still true love will scout: Thus fear false perils, scorn the true, Will trusty love and brave in you. O fitly we kept cloudy brow, Because of him, as laughter now. When we could say, 'Our King's not here,' We griev'd for him, no danger near: Now our hearts can no least joy lack, When we say, laughing, 'He's come back.' Be born, O, now; for why, fair child, delay? No sweeter hour will bring to thee the day. So many months wilt linger on the wing? The King returns; come thou, and welcome bring. What is our hail? our voice of triumph high? Thou wilt have said these better with thy cry. But stay; and soon new cause of triumph be; And yet in thee no new cause shall we see: Oft as to Charles is born new girl, new boy, Sure Charles himself returns, and brings us joy. Come, Muse, at call of thy Academy: With his own face our Phoebus here we see; His face his own yet, with its own red dyed, Which with its whiteness loves to be allied. O fierce disease, dost thou, with marks profane, Attempt these cheeks, that countenance, to stain? Most futile! Dost attempt our Phoebus' face? Not in our Phoebe her own spots canst trace. His self-asserting face disdains disease; 'Mid its own rays it sits, O well at ease. Sure God and heaven and holiest star are here; Sure 'neath these cheeks smiles Phoebus full and clear. Our King being safe in face, but touch'd elsewhere, Proves he was here a god, though a man there. Garlands! bring garlands, boy! what garden now Would not give flowers? with ready hand do thou Weave garlands. What! December, sayst thou, snow? Fool! hold thy blabbing, speak of what we know. Winter upon our shores, and snow? the thing Is not, and cannot be. It is the Spring: Whatever ghost threatens us with the drear Beatings of wild December, Spring is here. See'st thou not with what leaves the royal vine Spreads forth, what clusters on her boughs incline? Say, when like this was Winter ever seen To laugh and glow in purple? O great Queen, Offspring of gods, and mother! do we see The seasons thus a plaything made for thee? Thus with thy Spring mayst thou the stars restrain, That Winter sting not, nor the South bring rain. And do the lilies by thy grace alone Spring up, and know no snows except their own? In spite of all that Winter may oppose, Are thus our kingdoms blooming with the rose? O thou most blest disturber of the year, Who sufferest not the bounded seasons here To keep i' their own signs! destroyer kind Of Winter, whose sweet influence can bind All harsher murmurs of the world, still dare We pray thee, thus to force our calendar With thy fair violence; continue still The months to number at thine own sweet will; Still thus untimely, still thus burdensome, Make all things subject to thy royal womb. So, by thy grace, may it be often ours To see dethroned Winter deck'd in flowers; On snow that falls i' roses still to gaze, Sweet vernal Winters and December Mays! Let others by the stars compute their year, And count their days as wandering signs appear: Not so we Britons; not for us shall storm With cruel change our seasons dare deform; To thee, great Queen, our whole year we resign, O spend it all i' those rich births of thine! So the whole year shall own thy womb to be Its sovereign arbitress of good; in thee Merge all its titles. Where's the month could bear A more delicious name, or ever wear More whiteness? Janus, for his double crown, Covets this laurel; Maius for his own Would buy it, though his Chloris were the cost. Thee or thine infant, now that Spring has lost His ancient throne, the flow'ry states invite To take their empire. O blest year, how bright Thy fortunes, where each month in turn may claim From Mary or from Charles its mighty name! Hither, Muse, and bring again Thy august surrounding train; With measur'd tread of practis'd feet Come, for thou hast learn'd to greet With the voice of loyal cheer A princely cradle year by year. Lo, our noble Queen on thee Calls in fruitful rivalry By another birth; and he, Illustrious infant, needs must have The Muses' offspring for his slave. Never has she yet been known A mother for herself alone, But by a reflected might Even in absence doth delight In twins ever, and while she Thus augments her progeny, And gives vigour to the lyre, She doth at once with life inspire Young princes, and the Muses' quire. These, though not untouch'd they be With the sacred flame, may she Tire in her fruitful deity, And with joys that theirs outrun, Dry at last all Helicon! Sweet is the strife wherein, to prove Her powers, she deigns by rule to move; Nor an unbecoming stain Is the dust that they must gain, Who in such contest can but fight in vain. Nature, o'er day and night alternate dreaming, Brings forth a swart child now, and now a fair: On thee attends, O Queen in beauty beaming, A better Nature, with a rule how rare! Bright as thyself, thine own tend all the selfsame way; A daughter now, and now a son; but each a child of Deign, Queen, to this, unless we ask too much, A mother's, or at least grandmother's, touch. It is the Muse's rosy infant fine; Its father who would think? this Child of thine. So unrestrain'd the love of virgin Muse, To be a mother thus she can't refuse. From him what grandsons round thee soon will gather, Who at once father is, and makes a father! Grow, maiden Princess, and increase, Thou who with the sweet goddesses Thy place shalt have; O haste to be Thy mother's own epitome; And when that pair of minor flames, Thy princely brothers Charles and James, Apt in the footsteps of their sire, Lead on the Fates in glorious ire; When o'er the Bosphorus shall creep A thrill of dread, as rolls full deep The murmur of the British name, And with no feign'd alarm shall shame The Turkish Crescent other wars, And such as bring sweet Peace no tears Shall call thee forth; and from on high The flashing of thy modest eye Shall scatter o'er adoring foes Thick volleys of delicious woes. O, when that tender bloom which now Plays, lately born, beneath thy brow, In time to come with mightier blaze Shall dart around its pointed rays; When he, the Cupid now so mild, No longer but a harmless child, Shall range in youth's imperious pride Thy cheeks' fair pastures far and wide, O then with what unerring skill, Borne on proud wings, thy shafts shall kill, While, where thou bid'st, the honey'd blow Falls ceaseless midst the exulting foe! How many god-like breasts shall learn From thee with Love's rich wounds to burn! How often shall thy mastering darts Work their sweet will on princely hearts! For what may she not do in war, Whose mother's breast with each bright star That rul'd her birth to her but proves A storehouse of all-conquering loves? Hence for thy quiver, Princess Maid, Take what thou wilt, nor be afraid. A hundred Cupids be thy prize, From one of thy bright mother's eyes; A hundred graces add to these, And then a hundred Venuses: A hundred-thousand Cupids still Are hers; three hundred Graces will, With Venuses in equal store, Haunt that pure fount for evermore. Forbear thy fury, Winter fierce, forbear; Lay down thy wrath, and let the tranquil air With inspiration mild soothe the stern year: This time deserves it, and occasion dear. The wild North-wind may rage and wildly bluster; The gusty South its rainy clouds may muster; Yet here at least, if thou but will it so, Neither wild North nor gusty South will blow. For were it seemly, when events so bright Exalt us, and the universal light Of joy and vernal pleasure thrills the soul, Grim lines of battling tempest-clouds should roll Through all the air, and drown the year with rain? Better old Winter should bright youth regain, And turn at once to Spring; with tumult sweet Hasten his purple stores, and joyful greet With all his outpour'd heart this shining Day, And bid its fragrant hours for ever stay; Making a radiant wealth of flowers abound Where in her cradle that sweet Child is found, Her tender limbs caress and softly compass round. She comes! Once more are heard those blessed cries Within the palace. See a glory rise A star-like glory added to the other, A charming sister to a rosy brother! To this she stretches out her tiny arms, Fair Boy for thee displays the winsome charms Of her sweet smiles, and checks her gentle tears, And coos and prattles to delight thine ears, Or fondly hangs upon thy neck. Such grace Pleases the eye, when, their stalks joined, you place Lilies with roses to combine their splendour. And then appears such lustrous glory tender, When in the midst of heaven, at dewy eve, Two stars their gentle radiance interweave. Nor loftier grace that beauteous union show'd When from her egg the fairest Helen glow'd Betwixt her starry brothers, and display'd Her tender brow with new delights array'd. So mix your common beam, thou brother fair And sister mild. Such joys your father share And mother dear! And when, as seasons roll, He moves with head erect and princely soul Amid his proper triumphs, and shall learn Himself by his own deeds, thou shalt discern A riper flame within thee, heavenly dower, And star full-orb'd shalt shine, and full-grown flower; While a soft beauty bathes thy lustrous eyes, And rays of majesty the world surprise. Then O how oft, but that thou art more fair, Will some imaginary Phoebus swear That thou art his own Phoebe! or again But that thou art more chaste, some Mars in vain Will swear thou art his Venus, love's soft strain! Ah, happy he, to whom nor Mars will dream Nor golden Phoebus he can equal seem, Who with a wife so sweet, so fair is blest, And all the fond affection of thy breast, And tender, pure endearments; who alone Can call thy eyes and kisses all his own; And while he quaffs such nectar'd wine of love, Feels like a god, and scorns the feasts above. 'Twas now the time for thee, Mother most great, With these sweet eyes the day to accelerate; Time thy soft kisses should not idle be, Or from fit burden thy fair neck be free. For he, his parents' fear and hope confest, With whom thou first wast made a mother blest, He wraths and swords designs, courageous grown; Now more his father's is, and more his own. O spurs of nature! yet an infant, see He catches at the man impatiently, The rogue declines to keep in his own years; Not yet a child, he more than child appears. If on the tapestry, with feign'd anger fraught, A lion stands, by skilful needle wrought, A foe behold; such foe to fight he deigns; A lesser wrath his mighty hand disdains. Fierce spear he brandishes; a wand his spear: Soon in false breast behold true wound appear. The lion stands, maz'd by such enemy, Fearing or loving something in his eye, So sternly, sweetly bright; nor can he tell Whether beneath that eye Mars or Love dwell. In sooth, a Mars who may be lov'd is here; And Love indeed, but Love deserving fear. Such Love, such Mars, 'tis easy here to scan; This god or that, as he is boy or man. Thy babe now comes to take the endearing place, A creature not beyond thy fond embrace. Now let thy troops of kisses have their way, Now let thy love with brooding murmur play; Here is material tractable and tender, Which waxen surface to soft touch shall render. Hail, infant! gentle subject for caresses, Employment sweet a mother's lips which blesses; O hail; for with thy birth, thou golden boy, As bids the Day a keener longing stir The waking world, and warblings cheerier To birds inspires, when comes she o'er the hills, As quivering dart the streaks of Morn, and thrills Through lattic'd sky from roseate East the light Presaging his approach; nor absent quite, Nor glorying in his slacken'd reins, the Sun Is present all; and birds, to music won By gentle touch, are murmuring far and near, So we, on whom with radiance severe A solemn day begins to dawn; whose eye Now sees glide through the heavenly courts which lie, With portals wide God's house is heaven, we say The flame unsteady of still wavering Day Slenderly stealing in; the prospect nigher, Our hearts too labour with extreme desire, And throb with hopes impatient of their end. How love of such a work our heart doth rend! How long desire makes hopes in leash restrain'd To pant! O sweetest House, on which has rain'd The torrent of God's fulness. Ah, who is he, Ah, who O good, O huge in charity, O nigh to God Himself, Whom to descend On His own gracious gifts he prays shall lend This sacred twilight power to drive away All gloom, and shake her raiment into day? Ah, when, thou pitifully trem'lous bloom Of glimmering Day, that as from bridal room In the Orient cam'st to kiss our altar-stone, And beckonest to us from a star alone, In yonder distance shining doubtfully, Ah, when wilt thou expand to Day, and, free In conscious joy of thy full splendour, pour A flood of light, as when the Sun doth soar In golden mid-day, and, to full age grown, Shine through and through the pile, and make it own With awe thy sway, nor let the sacred walls Doubt thy embrace? Blest he to whom befalls To see the vaulted roofs span their fair sky, And break in flowers, while fretted ceilings lie Trembling with rosy laughter; which do now, As wearing of their shame a conscious brow, Bedew their formless face with dropping tear. When shall it be? the window growing clear With better light, that many a page devout May live, and life from glassy face breathe out. Ah, when, as hymn of praise we celebrate, Shall solemn-breathing murmur make vibrate The organ's nerves with graceful ceaseless hum; Nor pipe of lung unjust intruding come, Whatever else, in fine, this Sanctuary May need, that right-hand bless'd and happy be, And be it thine! to which the Dawn shall owe Its day. The altar kneels to thee. Do thou List to her prayer, and she will thine allow; Stretch out thy laden hand, and doubtful live Whether thou dost not more receive than give; That thou art happy do thou only hear, And turn thy loss to gain in yonder sphere. Thou know'st what wheel makes riches fly away; These riches therefore here securely lay, Fountains of a House perennial, On the Petrensian rock; from Fortune shall Her own wheel thus be wrench'd. Thou knowest how prone A wing bears up unconstant riches, blown On vagrant, veering winds. Come, take away These wings from fleeting riches, make them stay At these our altars, and build here their nest; Till arm'd with wings to better flight redress'd, They may transport themselves to the home of rest, Bearing their master with them. Blest that man Who knowing prudently the times to scan, The airiness of wealth to profit brings, And him on Fortune's pinions deftly flings, And to his riches adds an eagle's wings. O bird too fortunate, whose glorious name Fills us with envy of her happy fame, Which by an easy death on soaring wing, Sweet mother of herself, doth upwards spring, Assumes afresh her shining youth's attire, And wins new lease of life through hasten'd fire! She not through slow-revolving natal days To a thin shadow worn by sad delays Transports herself into another round Of centuries, as by a single bound; With beauteous leaves her head she covers o'er, And with a rosy birth shoots forth once more. Soon as she climbs the spicy funeral pyre Joyful she drinks the sun, and mounting higher, Now, now the ground her wings victorious strike, And her own ashes. But, alas, we follow No such example. 'Neath her own Apollo, Our Mother Peterhouse, now ancient grown, Our aged Phoenix, hither, thither blown, And balancing herself on doubtful air, Hovers with wing uncertain, seeking where Her relics she may lay, worn out with toils, As in a nest, and from the very spoils Of her own age renew'd, she may arise In perfect comeliness of face and eyes, As in the days of old, to mount the skies. But now, alas, e'en in the very throes Of her reviving age our Phoenix knows And keenly feels a sad deficiency. Alas, in life's long lingering effort she Now in the mean while dies. Of doubtful face, Her buildings seem in part bedeck'd with grace; But elsewhere, heedless of inviting calls To union, stand the unfinish'd brother walls. On unresponsive ears the summons falls; As stones to fellow-stones appealing turn, The interrupted works together mourn, And beg a helping hand. O, succour bring, Whoe'er is pious, to the parent wing Which shelter'd thee beneath its holy shade, And gave so many mother churches aid Parental; O, be now thy help display'd. Whoe'er thou art, the ruin'd courts to thee With gaping mouths are speaking audibly. Thy reverend mother would thine eyes engage To view thy walls, dismantled long with age And base neglect, and ponder her gray hair. By the full breasts which once she offer'd thee, By the dry breasts which she is doom'd to see Now for herself, she cries imploringly: 'My age to help, O fail not to appear; So may long-lasting youth thy bosom cheer, Youth which complaining age shall never fear.' O Phoenix, all-too-happy bird, Who enviless thy fame has heard? Thou, thine own mother, from the pyre Spices mix'd with flickering fire Sweetly didst thy breath suspire; Then rose again, and thy age gone In a swift resurrection Gone! by wondrous mystic skill Wearing a richer plumage still, Youth renew'd from feet to bill, Thou didst not linger in thine age, Nor a slow weary struggle wage, With changing cures and long delay Searching for life in every way. No; but a quick fate self-choosing, All hindering self-ruth refusing, Thou didst raise thy funeral pyre, Thou didst hovering i' the fire, From amidst the perfum'd flame Spring up, immortal as thy fame. Thou didst lift thy comely head, Ev'ry moulting feather shed; Thou didst raise thy radiant breast Blazing to the blazing West. O Phoenix, thou'rt an awful bird; Who enviless thy fame has heard? Climbing to thy funeral pyre, Climbing self-martyr'd to the fire, Sweetly there to bear thine ire; Fetching down from the great sun To piled nest of cinnamon Rays intense; then upward winging, Sudden from thine ashes springing; Victorious by this quaint mewing, Life strangely out of death renewing; Now i' the red fire consuming, Next at the sun thine eyes reluming. Alas, how different is the fate In this our later age, ingrate, Of her, my mother-college, lying All desolate and slowly dying; Lifting but a feeble wing, Though once, as Phoenix of the fire, Springing immortal from its pyre; Reign'd where Ruin now defaces, Gave her, when she shone in splendour, Orator, sage, and poet tender; Gave her sons, noble and good, Better than the bluest blood: O how chang'd, since those days olden Such as in the ages golden, I behold her, smitten, lorn, And by every Fury torn, Hanging in uncertain strife As it were 'twixt death and life; Doubting whether e'en she shall Have so much as funeral; Her corpse laid in some quiet bay, Where the sea-waves softly play; Willing they should take her bones Her time-stain'd, rent, and shatter'd stones; If only thus but once again Rebuilded, she might yet attain To something of her old renown By such resurrection, And, phoenix-like, herself out-do In her best days when she was new. O ye sons, your mother own In her desolation; Own her, though in aging years She shows few and thin gray hairs, Where once, ah in brave times of old Flash'd her proud locks with sheen of gold. Ah, Peter nam'd, thou art denied, Thus is thy name verified. 'Tis a spectacle for tears; 'Tis a spectacle for fears; 'Tis a spectacle for wonder; 'Tis a crime deserves the thunder, That from base to gold-touch'd ceiling Day by day her halls are reeling; Mullion'd window torn and rent, And destruction imminent; Everywhere such gaping wounds As a stranger e'en astounds; And what was in faith begun Left in desolation; Stone to stone in mute appealing, Cold neglect and scorn revealing, And the font of tears unsealing. Sons of my Mother-College lying All in ruins and slow dying, If ye have aught of piety Or least touch of charity, Look on these broken walls, and see Your mother in her misery; Holding up, in vain appealing, Wither'd hands, her woes revealing; And in the rank growths tangled there See her dishonoured gray hair. Woe is me, her genial breast, Which so many sons has blest, Each all welcoming that came, Drawn by her renowned name, Wither'd, shrunk, can quench no thirst, Ah, my heart with grief will burst. To my dim eye there rises clear The full tide that once roll'd here; Now shingle, sand, and fest'ring mud Tell of the far-refluent flood. O, pity her, ye sons, and vow Once more to crown your mother's brow; Once more to rear her crumbling walls; Once more to gather in her halls The young, the brave, the true, the good, The wise, the noble; and the Rood Over all shall bless and keep; So in old age ye shall not weep, Nor ever shall your fair fame sleep. A fourth time now our glebe for Ceres bears The golden locks of harvest; Bacchus wears Now the fourth season his bright vine-leaf crown, Since, scant'ly hoar as yet with the soft down Of her first plumage, in thy gentle breast My young Muse dar'd to build herself a nest. Here found she sun and shade and gentler heaven, And what with these is by the Muses given Were hers. Here sat she careless how the skies Might darken, or the blasts of winter rise; And here her voice reach'd thee, but by what move Of fate I know not, only that thy love Her voice did win; and now at length behold And ah, how much the child her arms enfold Is like the mother! she in tender years The parent of a tender babe appears. What lap, then, for this infant shall I find Fitter than thine, or known by me so kind? Yea, soon as she could speak, the wanton, she Said, 'He shall be my guardian,' meaning thee; And no ill forecast I would deem is this Of Genius true and favouring deities, That she so early should a sire divine Always so open, always so benign. Take, then, thine own she is beneath thy wing And of this gift accept the offering. So may Persuasion, who her fount has made Upon thy lips, still pour from thence unstay'd Her sacred honey; so be at the Court, Whereto with plausive wreaths she doth resort, No ears thy Siren move not; so, I pray, No hindering bar thy Tagus strive to stay, Or only such as erst thy stream has swept away. O thou, whose name to me was still endear'd E'en when the master's brow was justly fear'd; I, of thy realm the most inviolate part, By touch of thy birch-rod ne'er taught to smart, Give thee what through long years complains of thee That thou wast not enough a fear to me; That I, base subject of thy sceptre slow, Thy ferule's milder sway should only know. Sooth, in these leaves what faults soe'er thou see, Thy rod in every case should punish'd be. Then let this page for me the suffering pay; Here certainly thy rod may have full play; Howe'er that rod to me was once too mild, It may revenge it all on this my child; Here will thy nail discover where to rage, And scratch a learned blot across the page. These which are bad, forsooth, these things are mine; Would they were better, that they might be thine! Whate'er they are, these streams their fountain know, Nile from an unknown fount may proudly go. Not lightly what one's source may be we deem; Fountains give name and honour to their stream. So small my times perhaps may say of me An offspring of no fountain small was he. Only to say of me may it be thine: 'He was my least indeed but he was mine!' Beneath this earth, strew'd lightly, lies the head Of one whom Death himself had learnt to dread, Scarce venturing to claim; and falter'd much Ere he allow'd his threatening stroke to touch That sacred presence. These bright eyes from far He view'd; from far that face ray'd like a star. On whom when fame of letters lustre drew, He took it as his right, and richer grew By his own gifts to learning; whose serene Severity of manners seem'd to have been Temper'd by woman's softness; whose good name, In later as in early years the same, Stood firm; his fortune equal to his fame. His life so short, that not in haste he seem'd; So long, that weary he might not be deem'd: That such a one is dead, can it be dream'd? Stay thee a short space here, good passer-by, Upon thy way; Wherein a little while thou too must lie, Haste as thou may. Certes thou knowest that thy life-long quest Leads hither to the long, long sleep and rest: Grudge thee not, then, the tribute of a tear, Whilst, ling'ring, to this stone thou drawest near. It will reward thy stay, It will thy tears repay, To know Of the family of Harris, The most splendid name Where all have fame. Knowing that such an one did live, And how he liv'd great, noble, wise Know how all mortal hopes are fugitive; Height gauging depth with 'Here he lies.' Ah, miserable and lamenting both, that they See not his golden locks in years grow gray! He was A student of Christ College, A fellow of Pembroke Hall: To have him The two Colleges did strive In rivalry of love: But the great God put in His negative, To gain ampler knowledge Of which he was on earth a student consecrate; So, when Death summon'd him, he went elate. So wise his wit, By genius lit, In himself alone Many in one, You had a College, where Graces and Muses fair With Religion, you might see Twin'd hand in hand in amity. The ripen'd mind under a youthful face; Severest virtue under courtliest grace; Few years his, yet mellow'd as in age; A modesty that did all hearts engage: These self-reveal'd and self-revealing, That all his life seem'd but a fine concealing. Yea, ev'n in his death 'twas so; For being thus at length laid low, He chose no boastful tomb to tell How good the life that in him fell: By so much greater is the guest, Smaller the mound where he doth rest: Yea, in his death there was diminution: Great was the guest, but see how small the stone. On that very day he died in which the Church of England reads its even-song: He was snatch'd away, lest the wickedness of the times should contaminate his understanding, Huc, hospes, oculos flecte, sed lacrimis caecos, Legit optime haec, quem legere non sinit fletus. Ars nuper et natura, forma, virtusque Probare uno juvene quid queant omnes, Fuere tantae terra nuper fuit liti, Ergo huc ab ipso Judicem manent coelo. Stranger, bend here thine eyes, but dim with tears; Whom weeping blinds, best reader here appears. Art, Nature, Beauty, Virtue, all agree, Contending late with a warm rivalry, To show what in one youth all join'd would be. So great the strife they caus'd on earth of late, That here from heaven itself the Judge they wait. 'Awake, my soul, and come away! Put on thy best array; Least if thou longer stay, Thou lose some minitts of so blest a day. Goe run, And bid good-morrow to the sun; Welcome his safe return And that great Morne Wherein a God was borne, Whose story none can tell, But He whose every word's a miracle.' 'This new guest to her eyes new laws hath given; Twas once look up , 'tis now look down to heaven.' 'Reader, didst thou but know what sacred dust Thou tread'st upon, thou'dst judge thyself unjust Shouldst thou neglect a shower of tears to pay, To wash the sin of thy own feet away. That actor in the play, who, looking down When he should cry 'O heaven!' was thought a clown And guilty of a solecism, might have Applause for such an action o'er this grave. Here lies a piece of Heaven; and Heaven one day Will send the best in heaven to fetch't away.' La nymphe de ces eaux apercut Jesus-Christ, Et son pudique front de rougeur se couvrit.' The nymph of these waters perceived Jesus Christ, And her modest brow was dyed with shame. <|endofpoem|>
